All	identifying	details,	including	names,	have	been	changed	except	for	those	pertaining	to
the	authors’	family	members.	This	book	is	not	intended	as	a	substitute	for	advice	from	a
trained	professional.
Copyright	©	2011	by	Mind	Your	Brain,	Inc.,	and	Bryson	Creative	Productions,	Inc.
All	rights	reserved.
Published	in	the	United	States	by	Delacorte	Press,	an	imprint	of	The	Random	House
Publishing	Group,	a	division	of	Random	House,	Inc.,	New	York.
DELACORTE	and	colophon	are	registered	trademarks	of	Random	House,	Inc.
LIBRARY	OF	CONGRESS	CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION	DATA
Siegel,	Daniel	J.
		The	whole-brain	child	:	12	revolutionary	strategies	to	nurture	your	child’s	developing
mind	/	Daniel	J.	Siegel,	Tina	Payne	Bryson.
						p.	cm.
eISBN:	978-0-553-90725-4
1.	Parenting.			2.	Child	development.			3.	Child	rearing.
I.	Bryson,	Tina	Payne.			II.	Title.
HQ755.8.S53123	2011
649’.1019—dc22						2010052988
Illustrations	by	Tuesday	Mourning
Jacket	design:	Misa	Erder
v3.1_r2
Contents
Cover
Title	Page
Copyright
Introduction:	SURVIVE	AND	THRIVE
Chapter	1:	PARENTING	WITH	THE	BRAIN	IN	MIND
Chapter	2:	TWO	BRAINS	ARE	BETTER	THAN	ONE:	Integrating
the	Left	and	the	Right
Whole-Brain	Strategy	#1:	Connect	and	Redirect:	Surfing	Emotional
Waves
Whole-Brain	Strategy	#2:	Name	It	to	Tame	It:	Telling	Stories	to	Calm
Big	Emotions
Chapter	3:	BUILDING	THE	STAIRCASE	OF	THE	MIND:
Integrating	the	Upstairs	and	Downstairs	Brain
Whole-Brain	Strategy	#3:	Engage,	Don’t	Enrage:	Appealing	to	the
Upstairs	Brain
Whole-Brain	Strategy	#4:	Use	It	or	Lose	It:	Exercising	the	Upstairs
Brain
Whole-Brain	Strategy	#5:	Move	It	or	Lose	It:	Moving	the	Body	to
Avoid	Losing	the	Mind
Chapter	4:	KILL	THE	BUTTERFLIES!	Integrating	Memory	for
Growth	and	Healing
Whole-Brain	Strategy	#6:	Use	the	Remote	of	the	Mind:	Replaying
Memories
Whole-Brain	Strategy	#7:	Remember	to	Remember:	Making
Recollection	a	Part	of	Your	Family’s	Daily	Life
Chapter	5:	THE	UNITED	STATES	OF	ME:	Integrating	the	Many
Parts	of	the	Self
Whole-Brain	Strategy	#8:	Let	the	Clouds	of	Emotion	Roll	By:
Teaching	That	Feelings	Come	and	Go
Whole-Brain	Strategy	#9:	SIFT:	Paying	Attention	to	What’s	Going	On
Inside
Whole-Brain	Strategy	#10:	Exercise	Mindsight:	Getting	Back	to	the
Hub
Chapter	6:	THE	ME-WE	CONNECTION:	Integrating	Self	and
Other
Whole-Brain	Strategy	#11:	Increase	the	Family	Fun	Factor:	Making	a
Point	to	Enjoy	Each	Other
Whole-Brain	Strategy	#12:	Connect	Through	Conflict:	Teach	Kids	to
Argue	with	a	“We”	in	Mind
Conclusion:	BRINGING	IT	ALL	TOGETHER
Refrigerator	Sheet
Whole-Brain	Ages	and	Stages
Dedication
Acknowledgments
About	the	Authors
INTRODUCTION:
Survive	and	Thrive
You’ve	 had	 those	 days,	 right?	 When	 the	 sleep	 deprivation,	 the
muddy	cleats,	the	peanut	butter	on	the	new	jacket,	the	homework
battles,	the	Play-Doh	in	your	computer	keyboard,	and	the	refrains
of	“She	started	it!”	leave	you	counting	the	minutes	until	bedtime.
On	 these	 days,	 when	 you	 (again?!!)	 have	 to	 pry	 a	 raisin	 from	 a
nostril,	it	seems	like	the	most	you	can	hope	for	is	to	survive.
However,	 when	 it	 comes	 to	 your	 children,	 you’re	 aiming	 a	 lot
higher	than	mere	survival.	Of	course	you	want	to	get	through	those
di�cult	tantrum-in-the-restaurant	moments.	But	whether	you’re	a
parent	or	other	committed	caregiver	in	a	child’s	life,	your	ultimate
goal	is	to	raise	kids	in	a	way	that	lets	them	thrive.	You	want	them
to	enjoy	meaningful	relationships,	be	caring	and	compassionate,	do
well	in	school,	work	hard	and	be	responsible,	and	feel	good	about
who	they	are.
Survive.	Thrive.
We’ve	met	with	thousands	of	parents	over	the	years.	When	we
ask	them	what	matters	most	to	them,	versions	of	these	two	goals
almost	always	top	the	list.	They	want	to	survive	di�cult	parenting
moments,	and	they	want	their	kids	and	their	family	to	thrive.	As
parents	ourselves,	we	share	these	same	goals	for	our	own	families.
In	our	nobler,	calmer,	saner	moments,	we	care	about	nurturing	our
kids’	 minds,	 increasing	 their	 sense	 of	 wonder,	 and	 helping	 them
reach	their	potential	in	all	aspects	of	life.	But	in	the	more	frantic,
stressful,	
bribe-the-toddler-into-the-car-seat-so-we-can-rush-to-the-
soccer-game	moments,	sometimes	all	we	can	hope	for	is	to	avoid
yelling	or	hearing	someone	say,	“You’re	so	mean!”
Take	a	moment	and	ask	yourself:	What	do	you	really	want	for
your	children?	What	qualities	do	you	hope	they	develop	and	take
into	 their	 adult	 lives?	 Most	 likely	 you	 want	 them	 to	 be	 happy,
independent,	 and	 successful.	 You	 want	 them	 to	 enjoy	 ful�lling
relationships	and	live	a	life	full	of	meaning	and	purpose.	Now	think
about	 what	 percentage	 of	 your	 time	 you	 spend	 intentionally
developing	 these	 qualities	 in	 your	 children.	 If	 you’re	 like	 most
parents,	you	worry	that	you	spend	too	much	time	just	trying	to	get
through	 the	 day	 (and	 sometimes	 the	 next	 �ve	 minutes)	 and	 not
enough	 time	 creating	 experiences	 that	 help	 your	 children	 thrive,
both	today	and	in	the	future.
You	 might	 even	 measure	 yourself	 against	 some	 sort	 of	 perfect
parent	who	never	struggles	to	survive,	who	seemingly	spends	every
waking	 second	 helping	 her	 children	 thrive.	 You	 know,	 the	 PTA
president	who	cooks	organic,	well-balanced	meals	while	reading	to
her	 kids	 in	 Latin	 about	 the	 importance	 of	 helping	 others,	 then
escorts	them	to	the	art	museum	in	the	hybrid	that	plays	classical
music	 and	 mists	 lavender	 aromatherapy	 through	 the	 air-
conditioning	 vents.	 None	 of	 us	 can	 match	 up	 to	 this	 imaginary
superparent.	Especially	when	we	feel	like	a	large	percentage	of	our
days	 are	 spent	 in	 full-blown	 survival	 mode,	 where	 we	 �nd
ourselves	wild-eyed	and	red-faced	at	the	end	of	a	birthday	party,
shouting,	“If	there’s	one	more	argument	over	that	bow	and	arrow,
nobody’s	getting	any	presents!”
If	any	of	this	sounds	familiar,	we’ve	got	great	news	for	you:	the
moments	you	are	just	trying	to	survive	are	actually	opportunities	to	help
your	child	thrive.	At	times	you	may	feel	that	the	loving,	important
moments	(like	having	a	meaningful	conversation	about	compassion
or	 character)	 are	 separate	 from	 the	 parenting	 challenges	 (like
�ghting	 another	 homework	 battle	 or	 dealing	 with	 another
meltdown).	 But	 they	 are	 not	 separate	 at	 all.	 When	 your	 child	 is
disrespectful	and	talks	back	to	you,	when	you	are	asked	to	come	in
for	a	meeting	with	the	principal,	when	you	�nd	crayon	scribbles	all
over	your	wall:	these	are	survive	moments,	no	question	about	it.
But	at	the	same	time,	they	are	opportunities—even	gifts—because
a	 survive	 moment	 is	also	 a	 thrive	 moment,	 where	 the	 important,
meaningful	work	of	parenting	takes	place.
For	 example,	 think	 about	 a	 situation	 you	 often	 just	 try	 to	 get
through.	 Maybe	 when	 your	 kids	 are	 �ghting	 with	 each	 other	 for
the	third	time	within	three	minutes.	(Not	too	hard	to	imagine,	is
it?)	Instead	of	just	breaking	up	the	�ght	and	sending	the	sparring
siblings	 to	 di�erent	 rooms,	 you	 can	 use	 the	 argument	 as	 an
opportunity	 for	 teaching:	 about	 re�ective	 listening	 and	 hearing
another	 person’s	 point	 of	 view;	 about	 clearly	 and	 respectfully
communicating	 your	 own	 desires;	 about	 compromise,	 sacri�ce,
negotiation,	and	forgiveness.	We	know:	it	sounds	hard	to	imagine
in	 the	 heat	 of	 the	 moment.	 But	 when	 you	 understand	 a	 little	 bit
about	your	children’s	emotional	needs	and	mental	states,	you	can
create	this	kind	of	positive	outcome—even	without	United	Nations
peacekeeping	forces.
There’s	 nothing	 wrong	 with	 separating	 your	 kids	 when	 they’re
�ghting.	It’s	a	good	survival	technique,	and	in	certain	situations	it
may	 be	 the	 best	 solution.	 But	 often	 we	 can	 do	 better	 than	 just
ending	the	con�ict	and	noise.	We	can	transform	the	experience	into
one	 that	 develops	 not	 only	 each	 child’s	 brain	 but	 also	 her
relationship	 skills	 and	 her	 character.	 Over	 time,	 the	 siblings	 will
each	 continue	 to	 grow	 and	 become	 more	 pro�cient	 at	 handling
con�ict	 without	 parental	 guidance.	 This	 will	 be	 just	 one	 of	 the
many	ways	you	can	help	them	thrive.
What’s	great	about	this	survive-and-thrive	approach	is	that	you
don’t	 have	 to	 try	 to	 carve	 out	 special	 time	 to	 help	 your	 children
thrive.	You	can	use	all	of	the	interactions	you	share—the	stressful,
angry	 ones	 as	 well	 as	 the	 miraculous,	 adorable	 ones—as
opportunities	to	help	them	become	the	responsible,	caring,	capable
people	you	want	them	to	be.	That’s	what	this	book	is	about:	using
those	everyday	moments	with	your	kids	to	help	them	reach	their
true	potential.	The	following	pages	o�er	an	antidote	to	parenting
and	 academic	 approaches	 that	 overemphasize	 achievement	 and
perfection	 at	 any	 cost.	 We’ll	 focus	 instead	 on	 ways	 you	 can	 help
your	 kids	 be	 more	 themselves,	 more	 at	 ease	 in	 the	 world,	 �lled
with	 more	 resilience	 and	 strength.	 How	 do	 you	 do	 that?	 Our
answer	 is	 simple:	 you	 need	 to	 understand	 some	 basics	 about	 the
young	brain	that	you	are	helping	to	grow	and	develop.	That’s	what
The	Whole-Brain	Child	is	all	about.
HOW	TO	USE	THIS	BOOK
Whether	you’re	a	parent,	grandparent,	teacher,	therapist,	or	other
signi�cant	 caregiver	 in	 a	 child’s	 life,	 we’ve	 written	 this	 book	 for
you.	We’ll	use	the	word	“parent”	throughout,	but	we’re	talking	to
anyone	doing	the	crucial	work	of	raising,	supporting,	and	nurturing
kids.	 Our	 goal	 is	 to	 teach	 you	 how	 to	 use	 your	 everyday
interactions	as	opportunities	to	help	you	and	the	children	you	care
for	both	survive	and	thrive.	Though	much	of	what	you’ll	read	can
be	creatively	tailored	for	teens—in	fact,	we	plan	to	write	a	follow-
up	that	does	just	that—this	book	focuses	on	the	years	from	birth	to
twelve,	 centering	 especially	 on	 toddlers,	 school-age	 kids,	 and
preteens.
In	 the	 following	 pages	 we	 explain	 the	 whole-brain	 perspective
and	 give	 you	 a	 variety	 of	 strategies	 to	 help	 your	 children	 be
happier,	 healthier,	 and	 more	 fully	 themselves.	 The	�rst	 chapter
presents	 the	 concept	 of	 parenting	 with	 the	 brain	 in	 mind	 and
introduces	 the	 simple	 and	 powerful	 concept	 at	 the	 heart	 of	 the
whole-brain	 approach,	 integration.	Chapter	2	focuses	on	helping	a
child’s	left	brain	and	right	brain	work	together	so	the	child	can	be
connected	 to	 both	 his	 logical	 and	 emotional	 selves.	Chapter	 3
emphasizes	
the	
importance	
of	
connecting	
the	
instinctual
“downstairs	 brain”	 with	 the	 more	 thoughtful	 “upstairs	 brain,”
which	 is	 responsible	 for	 decision	 making,	 personal	 insight,
empathy,	and	morality.	Chapter	4	explains	how	you	can	help	your
child	deal	with	painful	moments	from	the	past	by	shining	the	light
of	 understanding	 on	 them,	 so	 they	 can	 be	 addressed	 in	 a	 gentle,
conscious,	 and	 intentional	 way.	Chapter	 5	 helps	 you	 teach	 your
kids	that	they	have	the	capacity	to	pause	and	re�ect	on	their	own
state	of	mind.	When	they	can	do	that,	they	can	make	choices	that
give	 them	 control	 over	 how	 they	 feel	 and	 how	 they	 respond	 to
their	world.	Chapter	6	highlights	ways	you	can	teach	your	children
about	 the	 happiness	 and	 ful�llment	 that	 result	 from	 being
connected	to	others,	while	still	maintaining	a	unique	identity.
A	 clear	 understanding	 of	 these	 di�erent	 aspects	 of	 the	 whole-
brain	approach	will	allow	you	to	view	parenting	in	a	whole	new
way.	As	parents,	we	are	wired	to	try	to	save	our	children	from	any
harm	and	hurt,	but	ultimately	we	can’t.	They’ll	fall	down,	they’ll
get	 their	 feelings	 hurt,	 and	 they’ll	 get	 scared	 and	 sad	 and	 angry.
Actually,	 it’s	 often	 these	 di�cult	 experiences	 that	 allow	 them	 to
grow	and	learn	about	the	world.	Rather	than	trying	to	shelter	our
children	 from	 life’s	 inevitable	 di�culties,	 we	 can	 help	 them
integrate	 those	 experiences	 into	 their	 understanding	 of	 the	 world
and	learn	from	them.	How	our	kids	make	sense	of	their	young	lives
is	not	only	about	what	happens	to	them	but	also	about	how	their
parents,	teachers,	and	other	caregivers	respond.
With	that	in	mind,	one	of	our	primary	goals	has	been	to	make
The	 Whole-Brain	 Child	 as	 helpful	 as	 possible	 by	 giving	 you	 these
speci�c	tools	to	make	your	parenting	easier	and	your	relationships
with	 your	 children	 more	 meaningful.	 That’s	 one	 reason	 roughly
half	of	every	chapter	is	devoted	to	“What	You	Can	Do”	sections,
where	we	provide	practical	suggestions	and	examples	of	how	you
can	apply	the	scientific	concepts	from	that	chapter.
Also,	at	the	end	of	each	chapter	you’ll	�nd	two	sections	designed
to	 help	 you	 readily	 implement	 your	 new	 knowledge.	 The	 �rst	 is
“Whole-Brain	 Kids,”	 written	 to	 help	 you	 teach	 your	 children	 the
basics	 of	 what	 we’ve	 covered	 in	 that	 particular	 chapter.	 It	 might
seem	strange	to	talk	to	young	children	about	the	brain.	It	is	brain
science,	 after	 all.	 But	 we’ve	 found	 that	 even	 small	 children—as
young	as	four	or	�ve—really	can	understand	some	important	basics
about	the	way	the	brain	works,	and	in	turn	understand	themselves
and	their	behavior	and	feelings	in	new	and	more	insightful	ways.
This	knowledge	can	be	very	powerful	for	the	child,	as	well	as	the
parent	 who	 is	 trying	 to	 teach,	 to	 discipline,	 and	 to	 love	 in	 ways
that	 feel	 good	 to	 both	 of	 them.	 We’ve	 written	 the	 “Whole-Brain
Kids”	sections	with	a	school-age	audience	in	mind,	but	feel	free	to
adapt	 the	 information	 as	 you	 read	 aloud,	 so	 that	 it’s
developmentally	appropriate	for	your	child.
The	other	section	at	the	end	of	each	chapter	is	called	“Integrating
Ourselves.”	Whereas	most	of	the	book	focuses	on	the	inner	life	of
your	child	and	the	connection	between	the	two	of	you,	here	we’ll
help	 you	 apply	 each	 chapter’s	 concepts	 to	 your	 own	 life	 and
relationships.	 As	 children	 develop,	 their	 brains	 “mirror”	 their
parent’s	 brain.	 In	 other	 words,	 the	 parent’s	 own	 growth	 and
development,	or	lack	of	those,	impact	the	child’s	brain.	As	parents
become	 more	 aware	 and	 emotionally	 healthy,	 their	 children	 reap
the	 rewards	 and	 move	 toward	 health	 as	 well.	 That	 means	 that
integrating	 and	 cultivating	 your	 own	 brain	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most
loving	and	generous	gifts	you	can	give	your	children.
Another	tool	we	hope	you’ll	�nd	helpful	is	the	“Ages	and	Stages”
chart	at	the	end	of	the	book,	where	we	o�er	a	simple	summary	of
how	the	book’s	ideas	can	be	implemented	according	to	the	age	of
your	child.	Each	chapter	of	the	book	is	designed	to	help	you	put	its
ideas	 immediately	 into	 practice,	 with	 multiple	 suggestions
appearing	 throughout	 to	 address	 various	 ages	 and	 stages	 of
childhood	development.	But	to	make	it	easier	for	parents,	this	�nal
reference	 section	 will	 categorize	 the	 book’s	 suggestions	 according
to	 age	 and	 development.	 If	 you’re	 the	 mother	 of	 a	 toddler,	 for
example,	you	can	quickly	�nd	a	reminder	of	what	you	can	do	to
enhance	integration	between	your	child’s	left	and	right	brain.	Then,
as	your	toddler	grows,	you	can	come	back	to	the	book	at	each	age
and	view	a	list	of	the	examples	and	suggestions	most	relevant	to
your	child’s	new	stage.
Additionally,	 just	 before	 the	 “Ages	 and	 Stages”	 section,	 you’ll
�nd	a	“Refrigerator	Sheet”	that	very	brie�y	highlights	the	book’s
most	important	points.	You	can	photocopy	this	sheet	and	place	it
on	the	refrigerator,	so	that	you	and	everyone	who	loves	your	kids
—parents,	babysitters,	grandparents,	and	so	on—can	work	together
on	behalf	of	your	children’s	overall	well-being.
As	we	hope	you’ll	see,	we’re	keeping	you	in	mind	as	we	work	to
make	 this	 book	 as	 accessible	 and	 easy	 to	 read	 as	 possible.	 As
scientists,	 we’ve	 emphasized	 precision	 and	 accuracy;	 as	 parents,
we’ve	aimed	for	practical	understanding.	And	we’ve	wrestled	with
this	tension	and	carefully	considered	how	best	to	provide	you	with
the	latest	and	most	important	information,	while	doing	it	in	a	way
that’s	clear,	helpful,	and	immediately	practical.	While	the	book	is
certainly	scienti�cally	based,	you	aren’t	going	to	feel	like	you’re	in
science	class	or	reading	an	academic	paper.	Yes,	it’s	brain	science,
and	we’re	absolutely	committed	to	remaining	true	to	what	research
and	science	demonstrate.	But	we’ll	share	this	information	in	a	way
that	 welcomes	 you	 in,	 rather	 than	 leaving	 you	 out	 in	 the	 cold.
We’ve	both	spent	our	careers	taking	complicated	but	vital	scienti�c
knowledge	about	the	brain	and	boiling	it	down	so	that	parents	can
understand	 it	 and	 immediately	 apply	 it	 in	 their	 interactions	 with
their	kids	on	a	daily	basis.	So	don’t	be	scared	o�	by	the	brain	stu�.
We	 think	 you’ll	 �nd	 it	 fascinating,	 and	 much	 of	 the	 basic
information	is	actually	pretty	simple	to	understand,	as	well	as	easy
to	use.	(If	you	are	interested	in	more	of	the	details	of	the	science
behind	what	we’re	presenting	in	these	pages,	take	a	look	at	Dan’s
books	Mindsight	and	The	Developing	Mind,	2nd	edition.)
Thanks	for	joining	us	on	this	journey	toward	a	fuller	knowledge
of	 how	 you	 can	 truly	 help	 your	 kids	 be	 happier,	 healthier,	 and
more	fully	themselves.	With	an	understanding	of	the	brain,	you	can
be	 more	 intentional	 about	 what	 you	 teach	 your	 kids,	 how	 you
respond	 to	 them,	 and	 why.	 You	 can	 then	 do	 much	 more	 than
merely	survive.	By	giving	your	children	repeated	experiences	that
develop	the	whole	brain,	you	will	face	fewer	everyday	parenting
crises.	But	more	than	that,	understanding	integration	will	let	you
know	your	child	more	deeply,	respond	more	e�ectively	to	di�cult
situations,	 and	 intentionally	 build	 a	 foundation	 for	 a	 lifetime	 of
love	 and	 happiness.	 As	 a	 result,	 not	 only	 will	 your	 child	 thrive,
both	now	and	into	adulthood,	but	you	and	your	whole	family	will
as	well.
Please	visit	us	at	our	website	and	tell	us	about	your	whole-brain
parenting	experiences.	We	look	forward	to	hearing	from	you.
Dan	and	Tina																							
www.WholeBrainChild.com
CHAPTER	1
Parenting	with	the	Brain	in	Mind
Parents	are	often	experts	about	their	children’s	bodies.	They	know
that	 a	 temperature	 above	 98.6	 degrees	 is	 a	 fever.	 They	 know	 to
clean	out	a	cut	so	it	doesn’t	get	infected.	They	know	which	foods
are	most	likely	to	leave	their	child	wired	before	bedtime.
But	even	the	most	caring,	best-educated	parents	often	lack	basic
information	 about	 their	 child’s	 brain.	 Isn’t	 this	 surprising?
Especially	 when	 you	 consider	 the	 central	 role	 the	 brain	 plays	 in
virtually	 every	 aspect	 of	 a	 child’s	 life	 that	 parents	 care	 about:
discipline,	 decision	 making,	 self-awareness,	 school,	 relationships,
and	so	on.	In	fact,	the	brain	pretty	much	determines	who	we	are
and	what	we	do.	And	since	the	brain	itself	is	signi�cantly	shaped
by	the	experiences	we	o�er	as	parents,	knowing	about	the	way	the
brain	changes	in	response	to	our	parenting	can	help	us	to	nurture	a
stronger,	more	resilient	child.
So	 we	 want	 to	 introduce	 you	 to	 the	 whole-brain	 perspective.
We’d	 like	 to	 explain	 some	 fundamental	 concepts	 about	 the	 brain
and	help	you	apply	your	new	knowledge	in	ways	that	will	make
parenting	 easier	 and	 more	 meaningful.	 We’re	 not	 saying	 that
raising	a	whole-brain	child	will	get	rid	of	all	the	frustrations	that
come	with	parenting.	But	by	understanding	a	few	simple	and	easy-to-
master	 basics	 about	 how	 the	 brain	 works,	 you’ll	 be	 able	 to	 better
understand	your	child,	respond	more	e�ectively	to	di�cult	situations,
and	build	a	foundation	for	social,	emotional,	and	mental	health.	What
you	 do	 as	 a	 parent	 matters,	 and	 we’ll	 provide	 you	 with
straightforward,	scienti�cally	based	ideas	that	will	help	you	build	a
strong	 relationship	 with	 your	 child	 that	 can	 help	 shape	 his	 brain
well	and	give	him	the	best	foundation	for	a	healthy	and	happy	life.
Let	us	tell	you	a	story	that	illustrates	how	useful	this	information
can	be	for	parents.
EEA	WOO	WOO
One	day	Marianna	received	a	call	at	work	telling	her	that	her	two-
year-old	son,	Marco,	had	been	in	a	car	accident	with	his	babysitter.
Marco	 was	 �ne,	 but	 the	 babysitter,	 who	 was	 driving,	 had	 been
taken	to	the	hospital	in	an	ambulance.
Marianna,	a	principal	at	an	elementary	school,	frantically	rushed
to	the	scene	of	the	accident,	where	she	was	told	that	the	babysitter
had	experienced	an	epileptic	seizure	while	driving.	Marianna	found
a	�re�ghter	unsuccessfully	attempting	to	console	her	toddler.	She
took	Marco	in	her	arms,	and	he	immediately	began	to	calm	down
as	she	comforted	him.
As	 soon	 as	 he	 stopped	 crying,	 Marco	 began	 telling	 Marianna
what	 had	 happened.	 Using	 his	 two-year-old	 language,	 which	 only
his	 parents	 and	 babysitter	 would	 be	 able	 to	 understand,	 Marco
continually	repeated	the	phrase	“Eea	woo	woo.”	“Eea”	is	his	word
for	“Sophia,”	the	name	of	his	beloved	babysitter,	and	“woo	woo”
refers	to	his	version	of	the	siren	on	a	�re	truck	(or	in	this	case,	an
ambulance).	 By	 repeatedly	 telling	 his	 mother	 “Eea	 woo	 woo,”
Marco	was	focusing	on	the	detail	of	the	story	that	mattered	most	to
him:	Sophia	had	been	taken	away	from	him.
In	a	situation	like	this,	many	of	us	would	be	tempted	to	assure
Marco	 that	 Sophia	 would	 be	 �ne,	 then	 immediately	 focus	 on
something	else	to	get	the	child’s	mind	o�	the	situation:	“Let’s	go
get	 some	 ice	 cream!”	 In	 the	 days	 that	 followed,	 many	 parents
would	 try	 to	 avoid	 upsetting	 their	 child	 by	 not	 discussing	 the
accident.	The	 problem	 with	 the	 “let’s	 go	 get	 some	 ice	 cream”
approach	is	that	it	leaves	the	child	confused	about	what	happened
and	 why.	 He	 is	 still	 full	 of	 big	 and	 scary	 emotions,	 but	 he	 isn’t
allowed	(or	helped)	to	deal	with	them	in	an	effective	way.
Marianna	didn’t	make	that	mistake.	She	had	taken	Tina’s	classes
on	 parenting	 and	 the	 brain,	 and	 she	 immediately	 put	 what	 she
knew	 to	 good	 use.	 That	 night	 and	 over	 the	 next	 week,	 when
Marco’s	 mind	 continually	 brought	 him	 back	 to	 the	 car	 crash,
Marianna	 helped	 him	 retell	 the	 story	 over	 and	 over	 again.	 She’d
say,	“Yes,	you	and	Sophia	were	in	an	accident,	weren’t	you?”	At
this	 point,	 Marco	 would	 stretch	 out	 his	 arms	 and	 shake	 them,
imitating	Sophia’s	seizure.	Marianna	would	continue,	“Yes,	Sophia
had	a	seizure	and	started	shaking,	and	the	car	crashed,	didn’t	it?”
Marco’s	 next	 statement	 was,	 of	 course,	 the	 familiar	 “Eea	 woo
woo,”	 to	 which	 Marianna	 would	 respond,	 “That’s	 right.	 The	 woo
woo	came	and	took	Sophia	to	the	doctor.	And	now	she’s	all	better.
Remember	 when	 we	 went	 to	 see	 her	 yesterday?	 She’s	 doing	 just
fine,	isn’t	she?”
In	allowing	Marco	to	repeatedly	retell	the	story,	Marianna	was
helping	 him	 understand	 what	 had	 happened	 so	 he	 could	 begin	 to
deal	with	it	emotionally.	Since	she	knew	the	importance	of	helping
her	son’s	brain	process	the	frightening	experience,	she	helped	him
tell	and	retell	the	events	so	that	he	could	process	his	fear	and	go	on
with	 his	 daily	 routines	 in	 a	 healthy	 and	 balanced	 way.	 Over	 the
next	few	days,	Marco	brought	up	the	accident	less	and	less,	until	it
became	 just	 another	 of	 his	 life	 experiences—albeit	 an	 important
one.
As	you	read	the	following	pages,	you’ll	learn	speci�cs	about	why
Marianna	 responded	 as	 she	 did,	 and	 why,	 both	 practically	 and
neurologically,	it	was	so	helpful	to	her	son.	You’ll	be	able	to	apply
your	new	knowledge	about	the	brain	in	numerous	ways	that	make
parenting	your	own	child	more	manageable	and	meaningful.
The	 concept	 at	 the	 heart	 of	 Marianna’s	 response,	 and	 of	 this
book,	 is	integration.	A	clear	understanding	of	integration	will	give
you	the	power	to	completely	transform	the	way	you	think	about
parenting	your	kids.	It	can	help	you	enjoy	them	more	and	better
prepare	them	to	live	emotionally	rich	and	rewarding	lives.
WHAT	IS	INTEGRATION	AND	WHY	DOES	IT	MATTER?
Most	 of	 us	 don’t	 think	 about	 the	 fact	 that	 our	 brain	 has	 many
di�erent	 parts	 with	 di�erent	 jobs.	 For	 example,	 you	 have	 a	 left
side	 of	 the	 brain	 that	 helps	 you	 think	 logically	 and	 organize
thoughts	into	sentences,	and	a	right	side	that	helps	you	experience
emotions	and	read	nonverbal	cues.	You	also	have	a	“reptile	brain”
that	allows	you	to	act	instinctually	and	make	split-second	survival
decisions,	and	a	“mammal	brain”	that	leads	you	toward	connection
and	relationships.	One	part	of	your	brain	is	devoted	to	dealing	with
memory;	another	to	making	moral	and	ethical	decisions.	It’s	almost
as	 if	 your	 brain	 has	 multiple	 personalities—some	 rational,	 some
irrational;	some	re�ective,	some	reactive.	No	wonder	we	can	seem
like	different	people	at	different	times!
The	key	to	thriving	is	to	help	these	parts	work	well	together—to
integrate	 them.	 Integration	 takes	 the	 distinct	 parts	 of	 your	 brain
and	 helps	 them	 work	 together	 as	 a	 whole.	 It’s	 similar	 to	 what
happens	 in	 the	 body,	 which	 has	 di�erent	 organs	 to	 perform
di�erent	 jobs:	 the	 lungs	 breathe	 air,	 the	 heart	 pumps	 blood,	 the
stomach	digests	food.	For	the	body	to	be	healthy,	these	organs	all
need	to	be	integrated.	In	other	words,	they	each	need	to	do	their
individual	job	while	also	working	together	as	a	whole.	Integration
is	simply	that:	linking	di�erent	elements	together	to	make	a	well-
functioning	 whole.	 Just	 as	 with	 the	 healthy	 functioning	 of	 the
body,	your	brain	can’t	perform	at	its	best	unless	its	di�erent	parts
work	 together	 in	 a	 coordinated	 and	 balanced	 way.	 That’s	 what
integration	 does:	 it	 coordinates	 and	 balances	 the	 separate	 regions
of	the	brain	that	it	links	together.	It’s	easy	to	see	when	our	kids
aren’t	 integrated—they	 become	 overwhelmed	 by	 their	 emotions,
confused	and	chaotic.	They	can’t	respond	calmly	and	capably	to	the
situation	 at	 hand.	 Tantrums,	 meltdowns,	 aggression,	 and	 most	 of
the	 other	 challenging	 experiences	 of	 parenting—and	 life—are	 a
result	of	a	loss	of	integration,	also	known	as	dis-integration.
We	want	to	help	our	children	become	better	integrated	so	they
can	use	their	whole	brain	in	a	coordinated	way.	For	example,	we
want	them	to	be	horizontally	integrated,	so	that	their	left-brain	logic
can	work	well	with	their	right-brain	emotion.	We	also	want	them
to	be	vertically	integrated,	so	that	the	physically	higher	parts	of	their
brain,	 which	 let	 them	 thoughtfully	 consider	 their	 actions,	 work
well	with	the	lower	parts,	which	are	more	concerned	with	instinct,
gut	reactions,	and	survival.
The	 way	 integration	 actually	 takes	 place	 is	 fascinating,	 and	 it’s
something	 that	 most	 people	 aren’t	 aware	 of.	 In	 recent	 years,
scientists	 have	 developed	 brain-scanning	 technology	 that	 allows
researchers	 to	 study	 the	 brain	 in	 ways	 that	 were	 never	 before
possible.	 This	 new	 technology	 has	 con�rmed	 much	 of	 what	 we
previously	believed	about	the	brain.	However,	one	of	the	surprises
that	 has	 shaken	 the	 very	 foundations	 of	 neuroscience	 is	 the
discovery	 that	 the	 brain	 is	 actually	 “plastic,”	 or	 moldable.	 This
means	that	the	brain	physically	changes	throughout	the	course	of
our	lives,	not	just	in	childhood,	as	we	had	previously	assumed.
What	 molds	 our	 brain?	 Experience.	 Even	 into	 old	 age,	 our
experiences	 actually	 change	 the	 physical	 structure	 of	 the	 brain.
When	we	undergo	an	experience,	our	brain	cells—called	neurons—
become	 active,	 or	 “�re.”	 The	 brain	 has	 one	 hundred	 billion
neurons,	each	with	an	average	of	ten	thousand	connections	to	other
neurons.	 The	 ways	 in	 which	 particular	 circuits	 in	 the	 brain	 are
activated	 determines	 the	 nature	 of	 our	 mental	 activity,	 ranging
from	 perceiving	 sights	 or	 sounds	 to	 more	 abstract	 thought	 and
reasoning.	When	neurons	�re	together,	they	grow	new	connections
between	them.	Over	time,	the	connections	that	result	from	�ring
lead	to	“rewiring”	in	the	brain.	This	is	incredibly	exciting	news.	It
means	that	we	aren’t	held	captive	for	the	rest	of	our	lives	by	the
way	our	brain	works	at	this	moment—we	can	actually	rewire	it	so
that	 we	 can	 be	 healthier	 and	 happier.	 This	 is	 true	 not	 only	 for
children	 and	 adolescents,	 but	 also	 for	 each	 of	 us	 across	 the	 life
span.
Right	 now,	 your	 child’s	 brain	 is	 constantly	 being	 wired	 and
rewired,	 and	 the	 experiences	 you	 provide	 will	 go	 a	 long	 way
toward	determining	the	structure	of	her	brain.	No	pressure,	right?
Don’t	 worry,	 though.	 Nature	 has	 provided	 that	 the	 basic
architecture	 of	 the	 brain	 will	 develop	 well	 given	 proper	 food,
sleep,	and	stimulation.	Genes,	of	course,	play	a	large	role	in	how
people	 turn	out,	especially	in	terms	of	temperament.	But	�ndings
from	 various	 areas	 in	 developmental	 psychology	 suggest	 that
everything	that	happens	to	us—the	music	we	hear,	the	people	we
love,	 the	 books	 we	 read,	 the	 kind	 of	 discipline	 we	 receive,	 the
emotions	we	feel—profoundly	a�ects	the	way	our	brain	develops.
In	 other	 words,	 on	 top	 of	 our	 basic	 brain	 architecture	 and	 our
inborn	temperament,	parents	have	much	they	can	do	to	provide	the
kinds	 of	 experiences	 that	 will	 help	 develop	 a	 resilient,	 well-
integrated	 brain.	 This	 book	 will	 show	 you	 how	 to	 use	 everyday
experiences	 to	 help	 your	 child’s	 brain	 become	 more	 and	 more
integrated.
For	example,	children	whose	parents	talk	with	them	about	their
experiences	 tend	 to	 have	 better	 access	 to	 the	 memories	 of	 those
experiences.	 Parents	 who	 speak	 with	 their	 children	 about	 their
feelings	have	children	who	develop	emotional	intelligence	and	can
understand	 their	 own	 and	 other	 people’s	 feelings	 more	 fully.	 Shy
children	 whose	 parents	 nurture	 a	 sense	 of	 courage	 by	 o�ering
supportive	explorations	of	the	world	tend	to	lose	their	behavioral
inhibition,	 while	 those	 who	 are	 excessively	 protected	 or
insensitively	 thrust	 into	 anxiety-provoking	 experiences	 without
support	tend	to	maintain	their	shyness.
There	is	a	whole	�eld	of	the	science	of	child	development	and
attachment	backing	up	this	view—and	the	new	�ndings	in	the	�eld
of	neuroplasticity	support	the	perspective	that	parents	can	directly
shape	the	unfolding	growth	of	their	child’s	brain	according	to	what
experiences	they	o�er.	For	example,	hours	of	screen	time—playing
video	 games,	 watching	 television,	 texting—will	 wire	 the	 brain	 in
certain	ways.	Educational	activities,	sports,	and	music	will	wire	it
in	other	ways.	Spending	time	with	family	and	friends	and	learning
about	 relationships,	 especially	 with	 face-to-face	 interactions,	 will
wire	it	in	yet	other	ways.	Everything	that	happens	to	us	a�ects	the
way	the	brain	develops.
This	 wire-and-rewire	 process	 is	 what	 integration	 is	 all	 about:
giving	 our	 children	 experiences	 to	 create	 connections	 between
di�erent	 parts	 of	 the	 brain.	 When	 these	 parts	 collaborate,	 they
create	and	reinforce	the	integrative	�bers	that	link	di�erent	parts
of	the	brain.	As	a	result,	they	are	connected	in	more	powerful	ways
and	can	work	together	even	more	harmoniously.	Just	as	individual
singers	in	a	choir	can	weave	their	distinct	voices	into	a	harmony
that	 would	 be	 impossible	 for	 any	 one	 person	 to	 create,	 an
integrated	brain	is	capable	of	doing	much	more	than	its	individual
parts	could	accomplish	alone.
That’s	what	we	want	to	do	for	each	of	our	kids:	help	their	brain
become	more	integrated	so	they	can	use	their	mental	resources	to
full	capacity.	This	is	exactly	what	Marianna	did	for	Marco.	When
she	 helped	 him	 retell	 the	 story	 over	 and	 over	 again	 (“Eea	 woo
woo”),	she	defused	the	scary	and	traumatic	emotions	in	his	right
brain	so	that	they	didn’t	rule	him.	She	did	so	by	bringing	in	factual
details	 and	 logic	 from	 his	 left	 brain—which,	 at	 two	 years	 old,	 is
just	beginning	to	develop—so	that	he	could	deal	with	the	accident
in	a	way	that	made	sense	to	him.
If	 his	 mother	 hadn’t	 helped	 him	 tell	 and	 understand	 the	 story,
Marco’s	 fears	 would	 have	 been	 left	 unresolved	 and	 could	 have
surfaced	in	other	ways.	He	might	have	developed	a	phobia	about
riding	in	cars	or	being	separated	from	his	parents,	or	his	right	brain
might	 have	 raged	 out	 of	 control	 in	 other	 ways,	 causing	 him	 to
tantrum	 frequently.	 Instead,	 by	 telling	 the	 story	 with	 Marco,
Marianna	 helped	 focus	 his	 attention	 both	 on	 the	 actual	 details	 of
the	accident	and	on	his	emotions,	which	allowed	him	to	use	both
the	left	and	right	sides	of	his	brain	together,	literally	strengthening
their	connection.	(We’ll	explain	this	particular	concept	much	more
fully	 in	chapter	 2.)	 By	 helping	 him	 become	 better	 integrated,	 he
could	 return	 to	 being	 a	 normal,	 developing	 two-year-old	 rather
than	dwelling	on	the	fear	and	distress	he	had	experienced.
Let’s	 look	 at	 another	 example.	 Now	 that	 you	 and	 your	 siblings
are	adults,	do	you	still	�ght	over	who	gets	to	push	the	button	for
the	elevator?	Of	course	not.	(Well,	we	hope	not.)	But	do	your	kids
squabble	and	bicker	over	this	kind	of	issue?	If	they’re	typical	kids,
they	do.
The	reason	behind	this	di�erence	brings	us	back	to	the	brain	and
integration.	Sibling	rivalry	is	like	so	many	other	issues	that	make
parenting	 di�cult—tantrums,	 disobedience,	 homework	 battles,
discipline	 matters,	 and	 so	 on.	 As	 we’ll	 explain	 in	 the	 coming
chapters,	these	everyday	parenting	challenges	result	from	a	lack	of
integration	 within	 your	 child’s	 brain.	 The	 reason	 her	 brain	 isn’t
always	 capable	 of	 integration	 is	 simple:	 it	 hasn’t	 had	 time	 to
develop.	In	fact,	it’s	got	a	long	way	to	go,	since	a	person’s	brain
isn’t	considered	fully	developed	until	she	reaches	her	mid-twenties.
So	that’s	the	bad	news:	you	have	to	wait	for	your	child’s	brain	to
develop.	 That’s	 right.	 No	 matter	 how	 brilliant	 you	 think	 your
preschooler	is,	she	does	not	have	the	brain	of	a	ten-year-old,	and
won’t	 for	 several	 years.	 The	 rate	 of	 brain	 maturation	 is	 largely
in�uenced	by	the	genes	we	inherit.	But	the	degree	of	integration
may	be	exactly	what	we	can	influence	in	our	day-to-day	parenting.
The	good	news	is	that	by	using	everyday	moments,	you	can	in�uence
how	 well	 your	 child’s	 brain	 grows	 toward	 integration.	 First,	 you	 can
develop	 the	 diverse	 elements	 of	 your	 child’s	 brain	 by	 o�ering
opportunities	 to	 exercise	 them.	 Second,	 you	 can	 facilitate
integration	so	that	the	separate	parts	become	better	connected	and
work	 together	 in	 powerful	 ways.	 This	 isn’t	 making	 your	 children
grow	up	more	quickly—it’s	simply	helping	them	develop	the	many
parts	 of	 themselves	 and	 integrate	 them.	 We’re	 also	 not	 talking
about	wearing	yourself	(and	your	kids)	out	by	frantically	trying	to
�ll	every	experience	with	signi�cance	and	meaning.	We’re	talking
about	 simply	 being	 present	 with	 your	 children	 so	 you	 can	 help
them	 become	 better	 integrated.	 As	 a	 result,	 they	 will	 thrive
emotionally,	intellectually,	and	socially.	An	integrated	brain	results
in	improved	decision	making,	better	control	of	body	and	emotions,
fuller	 self-understanding,	 stronger	 relationships,	 and	 success	 in
school.	 And	 it	 all	 begins	 with	 the	 experiences	 parents	 and	 other
caregivers	provide,	which	lay	the	groundwork	for	integration	and
mental	health.
GET	IN	THE	FLOW:
NAVIGATING	THE	WATERS	BETWEEN	CHAOS	AND	RIGIDITY
Let’s	 get	 a	 little	 more	 speci�c	 about	 what	 it	 looks	 like	 when	 a
person—child	or	adult—is	living	in	a	state	of	integration.	When	a
person	is	well	integrated,	he	enjoys	mental	health	and	well-being.
But	 that’s	 not	 exactly	 easy	 to	 de�ne.	 In	 fact,	 even	 though	 entire
libraries	have	been	written	discussing	mental	illness,	 mental	health
is	rarely	de�ned.	Dan	has	pioneered	a	de�nition	of	mental	health
that	researchers	and	therapists	around	the	world	are	now	beginning
to	 use.	 It’s	 based	 on	 the	 concept	 of	 integration	 and	 involves	 an
understanding	 of	 the	 complex	 dynamics	 surrounding	 relationships
and	 the	 brain.	 A	 simple	 way	 to	 express	 it,	 though,	 is	 to	 describe
mental	health	as	our	ability	to	remain	in	a	“river	of	well-being.”
Imagine	a	peaceful	river	running	through	the	countryside.	That’s
your	river	of	well-being.	Whenever	you’re	in	the	water,	peacefully
�oating	 along	 in	 your	 canoe,	 you	 feel	 like	 you’re	 generally	 in	 a
good	 relationship	 with	 the	 world	 around	 you.	 You	 have	 a	 clear
understanding	of	yourself,	other	people,	and	your	life.	You	can	be
�exible	 and	 adjust	 when	 situations	 change.	 You’re	 stable	 and	 at
peace.
Sometimes,	though,	as	you	�oat	along,	you	veer	too	close	to	one
of	the	river’s	two	banks.	This	causes	di�erent	problems,	depending
on	 which	 bank	 you	 approach.	 One	 bank	 represents	 chaos,	 where
you	 feel	 out	 of	 control.	 Instead	 of	 �oating	 in	 the	 peaceful	 river,
you	are	caught	up	in	the	pull	of	tumultuous	rapids,	and	confusion
and	turmoil	rule	the	day.	You	need	to	move	away	from	the	bank	of
chaos	and	get	back	into	the	gentle	flow	of	the	river.
But	 don’t	 go	 too	 far,	 because	 the	 other	 bank	 presents	 its	 own
dangers.	It’s	the	bank	of	rigidity,	which	is	the	opposite	of	chaos.	As
opposed	to	being	out	of	control,	rigidity	is	when	you	are	imposing
control	 on	 everything	 and	 everyone	 around	 you.	 You	 become
completely	unwilling	to	adapt,	compromise,	or	negotiate.	Near	the
bank	 of	 rigidity,	 the	 water	 smells	 stagnant,	 and	 reeds	 and	 tree
branches	 prevent	 your	 canoe	 from	 �owing	 in	 the	 river	 of	 well-
being.
So	 one	 extreme	 is	 chaos,	 where	 there’s	 a	 total	 lack	 of	 control.
The	 other	 extreme	 is	 rigidity,	 where	 there’s	 too	 much	 control,
leading	to	a	lack	of	�exibility	and	adaptability.	We	all	move	back
and	forth	between	these	two	banks	as	we	go	through	our	days—
especially	as	we’re	trying	to	survive	parenting.	When	we’re	closest
to	the	banks	of	chaos	or	rigidity,	we’re	farthest	from	mental	and
emotional	health.	The	longer	we	can	avoid	either	bank,	the	more
time	we	spend	enjoying	the	river	of	well-being.	Much	of	our	lives
as	adults	can	be	seen	as	moving	along	these	paths—sometimes	in
the	harmony	of	the	�ow	of	well-being,	but	sometimes	in	chaos,	in
rigidity,	or	zigzagging	back	and	forth	between	the	two.	Harmony
emerges	 from	 integration.	 Chaos	 and	 rigidity	 arise	 when
integration	is	blocked.
All	of	this	applies	to	our	kids	as	well.	They	have	their	own	little
canoes,	and	they	�oat	down	their	own	river	of	well-being.	Many	of
the	challenges	we	face	as	parents	result	from	the	times	when	our
kids	aren’t	in	the	�ow,	when	they’re	either	too	chaotic	or	too	rigid.
Your	three-year-old	won’t	share	his	toy	boat	at	the	park?	Rigidity.
He	 erupts	 into	 crying,	 yelling,	 and	 throwing	 sand	 when	 his	 new
friend	takes	the	boat	away?	Chaos.	What	you	can	do	is	help	guide
your	child	back	into	the	�ow	of	the	river,	into	a	harmonious	state
that	avoids	both	chaos	and	rigidity.
The	same	goes	for	older	children.	Your	normally	easygoing	�fth-
grader	 is	 crying	 hysterically	 because	 she	 didn’t	 get	 the	 solo	 she
wanted	 in	 the	 school	 play.	 She	 refuses	 to	 calm	 down	 and
repeatedly	tells	you	that	she	has	the	best	voice	in	her	grade.	She’s
actually	zigzagging	back	and	forth	between	the	banks	of	chaos	and
rigidity,	as	her	emotions	have	clearly	taken	control	of	her	logic.	As
a	result,	she	stubbornly	refuses	to	acknowledge	that	someone	else
might	be	just	as	talented.	You	can	guide	her	back	into	the	�ow	of
well-being	so	that	she	can	achieve	better	balance	within	herself	and
move	into	a	more	integrated	state.	(Don’t	worry—we’ll	o�er	you
plenty	of	ways	to	do	this.)
Virtually	 all	 survival	 moments	 �t	 into	 this	 framework	 in	 one
way	or	another.	We	think	you	may	be	astounded	to	see	how	well
the	 ideas	 of	 chaos	 and	 rigidity	 help	 you	 understand	 your	 child’s
most	 di�cult	 behaviors.	 These	 concepts	 actually	 allow	 you	 to
“take	the	temperature”	of	how	well	integrated	your	child	is	at	any
given	moment.	If	you	see	chaos	and/or	rigidity,	you	know	she’s	not
in	 a	 state	 of	 integration.	 Likewise,	 when	 she	is	 in	 a	 state	 of
integration,	 she	 demonstrates	 the	 qualities	 we	 associate	 with
someone	who	is	mentally	and	emotionally	healthy:	she	is	�exible,
adaptive,	 stable,	 and	 able	 to	 understand	 herself	 and	 the	 world
around	 her.	 The	 powerful	 and	 practical	 approach	 of	 integration
enables	 us	 to	 see	 the	 many	 ways	 in	 which	 our	 children—or	 we
ourselves—experience	 chaos	 and	 rigidity	 because	 integration	 has
been	 blocked.	 When	 we	 become	 aware	 of	 this	 idea,	 we	 can	 then
create	and	carry	out	strategies	that	promote	integration	in	our	kids’
lives	 and	 in	 our	 own.	 These	 are	 the	 day-to-day	 whole-brain
strategies	we’ll	explore	in	each	of	the	following	chapters.
CHAPTER	2
Two	Brains	Are	Better	Than	One
Integrating	the	Left	and	the	Right
Thomas’s	 four-year-old	 daughter,	 Katie,	 loved	 her	 preschool	 and
never	minded	saying	goodbye	to	her	dad	when	it	was	time	for	him
to	 leave—until	 the	 day	 she	 got	 sick	 in	 class.	 Her	 teacher	 phoned
Thomas,	who	came	to	pick	her	up	right	away.	The	next	day,	Katie
began	crying	when	it	was	time	to	get	ready	for	school,	even	though
by	 then	 she	 was	 feeling	 �ne.	 The	 same	 thing	 happened	 morning
after	morning	for	the	next	few	days.	He	could	eventually	get	her
dressed,	but	things	only	got	worse	when	they	arrived	at	school.
As	Thomas	put	it,	Katie	would	increasingly	“freak	out”	once	they
got	out	of	their	car	in	the	school	parking	lot.	First	she’d	begin	to
practice	 some	 sort	 of	 civil	 disobedience	 as	 they	 approached	 the
school	 building.	 She	 would	 walk	 alongside	 her	 father,	 but	 as	 she
somehow	 made	 her	 tiny	 body	 heavier	 than	 a	 grand	 piano,	 her
resistance	would	turn	their	stroll	into	more	of	a	drag.	Then,	when
they	 reached	 the	 classroom,	 she	 would	 squeeze	 her	 dad’s	 hand
harder	and	harder	and	perform	the	classic	“power	lean,”	putting	all
of	her	baby-grand	weight	on	Thomas’s	leg.	When	he	could	�nally
extricate	 himself	 from	 her	 clutches	 and	 exit	 the	 room,	 he	 would
hear	her	shout	above	all	the	noise	of	the	other	kids,	“I’ll	die	if	you
leave	me!”
This	 type	 of	 separation	 anxiety	 is	 very	 normal	 for	 young
children.	 School	 can	 be	 a	 scary	 place	 at	 times.	 But	 as	 Thomas
explained,	 “Katie	 absolutely	 lived	 for	 school	 before	 she	 got	 sick.
She	loved	the	activities,	the	friends,	the	stories.	And	she	adored	her
teacher.”
So	 what	 happened?	 How	 did	 the	 simple	 experience	 of	 getting
sick	create	such	an	extreme	and	irrational	fear	in	Katie,	and	what
was	 the	 best	 way	 for	 Thomas	 to	 respond?	 His	 immediate	 goal:
come	 up	 with	 a	 strategy	 to	 get	 Katie	 to	 willingly	 attend	 school
again.	That	was	his	“survive”	goal.	But	he	also	wanted	to	turn	this
di�cult	experience	into	an	opportunity	that	would	bene�t	Katie	in
both	the	short	and	the	long	term.	That	was	his	“thrive”	goal.
We’ll	come	back	to	how	Thomas	handled	the	situation,	using	his
basic	knowledge	about	the	brain	to	turn	a	survival	moment	into	an
opportunity	to	help	his	daughter	thrive.	Speci�cally,	he	understood
what	we’re	going	to	show	you	now:	some	simple	principles	about
how	the	two	different	sides	of	the	brain	work.
LEFT	BRAIN,	RIGHT	BRAIN:	AN	INTRODUCTION
You	 probably	 know	 that	 your	 brain	 is	 divided	 into	 two
hemispheres.	 Not	 only	 are	 these	 two	 sides	 of	 the	 brain
anatomically	 separate;	 they	 also	 function	 very	 di�erently.	 Some
people	even	say	that	the	two	hemispheres	have	their	own	distinct
personalities,	 each	 side	 with	 a	 “mind	 of	 its	 own.”	 The	 scienti�c
community	 refers	 to	 the	 way	 the	 di�erent	 sides	 of	 the	 brain
in�uence	 us	 as	 left-hemisphere	 and	 right-hemisphere	 modalities.
But	for	simplicity’s	sake,	we’ll	just	go	with	the	common	usage	and
talk	about	your	left	brain	and	your	right	brain.
Your	 left	 brain	 loves	 and	 desires	 order.	 It	 is	logical,	 literal,
linguistic	(it	likes	words),	and	linear	(it	puts	things	in	a	sequence	or
order).	The	left	brain	loves	that	all	four	of	these	words	begin	with
the	letter	L.	(It	also	loves	lists.)
The	 right	 brain,	 on	 the	 other	 hand,	 is	 holistic	 and	 nonverbal,
sending	and	receiving	signals	that	allow	us	to	communicate,	such	as
facial	expressions,	eye	contact,	tone	of	voice,	posture,	and	gestures.
Instead	 of	 details	 and	 order,	 our	 right	 brain	 cares	 about	 the	 big
picture—the	meaning	and	feel	of	an	experience—and	specializes	in
images,	emotions,	and	personal	memories.	We	get	a	“gut	feeling”
or	“heart-felt	sense”	from	our	right	brain.	Some	say	the	right	brain
is	more	intuitive	and	emotional,	and	we’ll	use	those	terms	in	the
following	pages	as	a	helpful	shorthand	to	talk	about	what	the	right
brain	does.	But	keep	in	mind	that	technically,	it’s	more	accurate	to
talk	about	this	side	of	the	brain	as	more	directly	in�uenced	by	the
body	and	lower	brain	areas,	which	allow	it	to	receive	and	interpret
emotional	information.	It	can	get	complicated,	but	the	basic	idea	is
that	while	the	left	brain	is	logical,	linguistic,	and	literal,	the	right
brain	is	emotional,	nonverbal,	experiential,	and	autobiographical—
and	 it	 doesn’t	 care	 at	 all	 that	 these	 words	 don’t	 begin	 with	 the
same	letter.
You	 might	 think	 of	 it	 this	 way:	 the	 left	 brain	 cares	 about	 the
letter	of	the	law	(more	of	those	L’s).	As	you	know,	as	kids	get	older
they	get	really	good	at	using	this	left-brain	thinking:	“I	didn’t	shove
her!	I	pushed	her.”	The	right	brain,	on	the	other	hand,	cares	about
the	spirit	of	the	law,	the	emotions	and	experiences	of	relationships.
The	left	focuses	on	the	text—the	right	is	about	the	context.	It	was
the	nonlogical,	emotional	right	brain	that	prompted	Katie	to	yell	to
her	father,	“I’ll	die	if	you	leave	me!”
In	 terms	 of	 development,	 very	 young	 children	 are	 right-
hemisphere	 dominant,	 especially	 during	 their	 �rst	 three	 years.
They	haven’t	mastered	the	ability	to	use	logic	and	words	to	express
their	feelings,	and	they	live	their	lives	completely	in	the	moment—
which	 is	 why	 they	 will	 drop	 everything	 to	 squat	 down	 and	 fully
absorb	themselves	in	watching	a	ladybug	crawl	along	the	sidewalk,
not	caring	one	bit	that	they	are	late	for	their	toddler	music	class.
Logic,	responsibilities,	and	time	don’t	exist	for	them	yet.	But	when
a	toddler	begins	asking	“Why?”	all	the	time,	you	know	that	the	left
brain	 is	 beginning	 to	 really	 kick	 in.	 Why?	 Because	 our	 left	 brain
likes	 to	 know	 the	 linear	 cause-e�ect	 relationships	 in	 the	 world—
and	to	express	that	logic	with	language.
TWO	HALVES	MAKE	A	WHOLE:	COMBINING	THE	LEFT	AND	THE	RIGHT
In	 order	 to	 live	 balanced,	 meaningful,	 and	 creative	 lives	 full	 of
connected	relationships,	it’s	crucial	that	our	two	hemispheres	work
together.	The	very	architecture	of	the	brain	is	designed	this	way.
For	 example,	 the	 corpus	 callosum	 is	 a	 bundle	 of	 �bers	 that	 runs
along	the	center	of	the	brain,	connecting	the	right	hemisphere	with
the	left.	The	communication	that	takes	place	between	the	two	sides
of	 our	 brain	 is	 conducted	 across	 these	 �bers,	 allowing	 the	 two
hemispheres	to	work	as	a	team—which	is	exactly	what	we	want	for
our	kids.	We	want	them	to	become	horizontally	integrated,	 so	 that
the	 two	 sides	 of	 their	 brain	 can	 act	 in	 harmony.	 That	 way,	 our
children	will	value	both	their	logic	and	their	emotions;	they	will	be
well	balanced	and	able	to	understand	themselves	and	the	world	at
large.
The	 brain	 has	 two	 sides	 for	 a	 reason:	 with	 each	 side	 having
specialized	 functions,	 we	 can	 achieve	 more	 complex	 goals	 and
carry	out	more	intricate,	sophisticated	tasks.	Signi�cant	problems
arise	when	the	two	sides	of	our	brain	are	not	integrated	and	we	end
up	coming	at	our	experiences	primarily	from	one	side	or	the	other.
Using	 only	 the	 right	 or	 left	 brain	 would	 be	 like	 trying	 to	 swim
using	only	one	arm.	We	might	be	able	to	do	it,	but	wouldn’t	we	be
a	lot	more	successful—and	avoid	going	in	circles—if	we	used	both
arms	together?
It’s	 the	 same	 with	 the	 brain.	 Think	 about	 our	 emotions,	 for
example.	They’re	absolutely	crucial	if	we	are	to	live	meaningfully,
but	we	don’t	want	them	to	completely	rule	our	lives.	If	our	right
brain	 took	 over	 and	 we	 ignored	 the	 logic	 of	 our	 left	 brain,	 we
would	 feel	 like	 we	 were	 drowning	 in	 images,	 bodily	 sensations,
and	what	could	feel	like	an	emotional	�ood.	But	at	the	same	time,
we	don’t	want	to	use	only	our	left	brain,	divorcing	our	logic	and
language	 from	 our	 feelings	 and	 personal	 experiences.	 That	 would
feel	like	living	in	an	emotional	desert.
The	goal	is	to	avoid	living	in	an	emotional	�ood	or	an	emotional
desert.	We	want	to	allow	our	nonrational	images,	autobiographical
memories,	and	vital	emotions	to	play	their	important	roles,	but	we
also	 want	 to	 integrate	 them	 with	 the	 parts	 of	 ourselves	that	 give
our	lives	order	and	structure.	When	Katie	freaked	out	about	being
left	at	preschool,	she	was	working	mostly	from	her	right	brain.	As
a	 result,	 Thomas	 witnessed	 an	 illogical	 emotional	 �ood,	 where
Katie’s	emotional	right	brain	wasn’t	working	in	a	coordinated	way
with	her	logical	left	brain.
Here	 it’s	 important	 to	 note	 that	 it’s	 not	 only	 our	 children’s
emotional	�oods	that	cause	problems.	An	emotional	desert,	where
feelings	and	the	right	brain	are	ignored	or	denied,	is	no	healthier
than	a	flood.	We	see	this	response	more	often	in	older	children.	For
example,	Dan	tells	a	story	of	an	exchange	with	a	twelve-year-old
girl	 who	 came	 to	 see	 him	 with	 a	 scenario	 many	 of	 us	 have
experienced:
Amanda	 mentioned	 a	 �ght	 she’d	 had	 with	 her	 best	 friend.	 I
knew	from	her	mother	that	this	argument	had	been	extremely
painful	 for	 Amanda,	 but	 as	 she	 talked	 about	 it,	 she	 just
shrugged	 and	 stared	 out	 the	 window,	 saying,	 “I	 don’t	 really
care	 if	 we	 never	 talk	 again.	 She	 annoys	 me	 anyway.”	 The
expression	on	her	face	seemed	cold	and	resigned,	but	in	the
subtle	 quiver	 of	 her	 lower	 lips	 and	 the	 gentle	 opening	 and
closing	of	her	eyelids,	almost	like	a	tremor,	I	could	sense	the
right-hemisphere	nonverbal	signals	revealing	what	we	might
call	 her	 “real	 feelings.”	 Rejection	 is	 painful,	 and	 at	 this
moment,	 Amanda’s	 way	 of	 dealing	 with	 that	 sense	 of
vulnerability	was	to	“retreat	to	the	left,”	running	to	the	arid
(but	predictable	and	controllable)	emotional	desert	of	the	left
side	of	her	brain.
I	 had	 to	 help	 her	 understand	 that	 even	 though	 it	 was
painful	to	think	about	the	con�ict	with	her	friend,	she	needed
to	pay	attention	to,	and	even	honor,	what	was	going	on	in	her
right	brain,	since	the	right	brain	is	more	directly	connected	to
our	bodily	sensations	and	the	input	from	lower	parts	of	the
brain	 that	 combine	 together	 to	 create	 our	 emotions.	 In	 this
way,	 all	 of	 the	 imagery,	 sensations,	 and	 autobiographical
memories	 from	 the	 right	 are	 infused	 with	 emotion.	 When
we’re	 upset,	 it	 can	 feel	 safer	 to	 withdraw	 from	 this
unpredictable	right-sided	awareness	and	retreat	into	the	more
predictable	and	controlled	logical	land	of	the	left.
The	key	to	helping	Amanda	was	for	me	to	attune	to	those
real	feelings	gently.	I	didn’t	point	out	abruptly	that	she	was
hiding,	even	 from	 herself,	 how	 this	 important	 person	 in	 her
life	had	hurt	her.	Instead,	I	allowed	myself	to	feel	what	she
was	feeling,	then	tried	to	communicate	from	my	right	brain	to
her	right	brain.	Using	my	facial	expressions	and	posture,	I	let
her	 know	 that	 I	 was	 really	 tuning	 in	 to	 her	 emotions.	 That
attunement	helped	her	“feel	felt”—to	know	that	she	was	not
alone,	 that	 I	 was	 interested	 in	 what	 she	 was	 feeling	 inside,
not	only	what	she	was	doing	on	the	outside.	Then,	once	we
had	 established	 this	 sense	 of	 connection	 between	 us,	 words
came	more	naturally	for	both	of	us,	and	we	could	begin	to	get
to	the	bottom	of	what	was	going	on	inside	of	her.	By	asking
her	to	tell	the	story	about	the	�ght	with	her	best	friend	and
having	her	pause	the	story	at	di�erent	times	to	observe	subtle
shifts	in	her	feelings,	I	was	able	to	reintroduce	Amanda	to	her
real	emotions	and	to	help	her	deal	with	them	in	a	productive
way.	This	is	how	I	tried	to	connect	with	both	her	right	brain
with	its	feelings,	bodily	sensations,	and	images	and	with	her
left	brain,	with	its	words	and	ability	to	tell	the	linear	story	of
her	experience.	When	we	see	how	this	happens	in	the	brain,
we	 can	 understand	 how	 linking	 the	 two	 sides	 to	 each	 other
can	completely	change	the	outcome	of	an	interaction.
We	don’t	want	our	children	to	hurt.	But	we	also	want	them	to	do
more	than	simply	get	through	their	di�cult	times;	we	want	them
to	 face	 their	 troubles	 and	 grow	 from	 them.	 When	 Amanda
retreated	to	the	left,	hiding	from	all	of	the	painful	emotions	that
were	running	through	her	right	brain,	she	denied	an	important	part
of	herself	that	she	needed	to	acknowledge.
Denial	of	our	emotions	isn’t	the	only	danger	we	face	when	we
rely	too	heavily	on	our	left	brain.	We	can	also	become	too	literal,
leaving	 us	 without	 a	 sense	 of	 perspective,	 where	 we	 miss	 the
meaning	that	comes	from	putting	things	in	context	(a	specialty	of
the	right	brain).	This	is	part	of	what	causes	your	eight-year-old	to
become	defensive	and	angry	sometimes	when	you	innocently	joke
around	 with	 her.	 Remember	 that	 the	 right	 brain	 is	 in	 charge	 of
reading	nonverbal	cues.	So	especially	if	she	is	tired	or	moody,	she
might	 focus	 only	 on	 your	 words	 and	 miss	 your	 playful	 tone	 of
voice	and	the	wink	that	went	with	it.
Tina	 recently	 witnessed	 a	 funny	 example	 of	 what	 can	 happen
when	the	literal	left	brain	takes	over	too	much.	When	her	youngest
son	 turned	 one,	 she	 ordered	 his	 cake	 from	 a	 local	 grocery	 store.
She	 requested	 a	 “cupcake	 cake,”	 which	 is	 a	 group	 of	 cupcakes
frosted	to	look	like	one	big	cake.	When	she	placed	the	order,	she
asked	 the	 decorator	 to	 write	 her	 son’s	 name—J.P.—on	 the
cupcakes.	Unfortunately,	when	she	picked	up	the	cake	before	the
party,	she	immediately	noticed	a	problem	that	demonstrates	what
can	happen	when	a	person	becomes	too	left-brain	literal.
When	Tina	told	the	baker	she	wanted	the	cake	to	say	J.P.	on	the	cupcakes,	a	literal,
left-brain	interpretation	was	not	what	she	expected.
The	goal,	then,	is	to	help	our	kids	learn	to	use	both	sides	of	the
brain	 together—to	 integrate	 the	 left	 and	 right	 hemispheres.
Remember	the	river	of	well-being	discussed	earlier,	with	chaos	as
one	 bank	 and	 rigidity	 as	 the	 other.	 We	 de�ned	 mental	 health	 as
remaining	in	the	harmonious	�ow	between	these	two	extremes.	By
helping	 our	 kids	 connect	 left	 and	 right,	 we	 give	 them	 a	 better
chance	of	avoiding	the	banks	of	chaos	and	rigidity,	and	of	living	in
the	flexible	current	of	mental	health	and	happiness.
Integrating	 the	 left	 brain	 with	 the	 right	 helps	 to	 keep	 children
from	 �oating	 too	 close	 to	 one	 bank	 or	 the	 other.	 When	 the	 raw
emotions	in	their	right	brain	are	not	combined	with	the	logic	of	the
left,	they	will	be	like	Katie,	�oating	too	close	to	the	bank	of	chaos.
That	 means	 we	 need	 to	 help	 them	 bring	 in	 the	 left	 brain	 to	 get
some	 perspective	 and	 handle	 their	 emotions	 in	 a	 positive	 way.
Likewise,	 if	 they’re	 denying	 their	 emotions	 and	 retreating	 to	 the
left,	as	Amanda	was	doing,	they’re	hugging	the	bank	of	rigidity.	In
that	case,	we	need	to	help	them	bring	in	more	of	the	right	brain	so
they	can	be	open	to	new	input	and	experiences.
So	 how	 do	 we	 promote	 horizontal	 integration	 in	 our	 child’s
brain?	 Here	 are	 two	 strategies	 you	 can	 use	 right	 away	 when
“integration	 opportunities”	 arise	 in	 your	 family.	 By	 using	 these
techniques,	you’ll	be	taking	immediate	steps	toward	integrating	the
left	and	right	hemispheres	of	your	child’s	brain.
What	You	Can	Do:
Helping	Your	Child	Work	from	Both	Sides	of	the	Brain
Whole-Brain	Strategy	#1:
Connect	and	Redirect:	Surfing	Emotional	Waves
One	night	Tina’s	seven-year-old	son	reappeared	in	the	living	room
shortly	after	going	to	bed,	explaining	that	he	couldn’t	sleep.	He	was
clearly	upset	and	explained,	“I’m	mad	that	you	never	leave	me	a
note	in	the	middle	of	the	night!”	Surprised	at	this	unusual	outburst,
Tina	replied,	“I	didn’t	know	you	wanted	me	to.”	His	response	was
to	unleash	a	whole	litany	of	rapid-�re	complaints:	“You	never	do
anything	nice	for	me,	and	I’m	mad	because	my	birthday	isn’t	for
ten	more	months,	and	I	hate	homework!”
Logical?	 No.	 Familiar?	 Yes.	 All	 parents	 experience	 times	 when
their	children	say	things	and	get	upset	about	issues	that	don’t	seem
to	make	sense.	An	encounter	like	this	can	be	frustrating,	especially
when	you	expect	your	child	to	be	old	enough	to	act	rationally	and
hold	 a	 logical	 conversation.	 All	 of	 a	 sudden,	 though,	 he	 becomes
upset	about	something	ridiculous,	and	it	seems	that	absolutely	no
amount	of	reasoning	on	your	part	will	help.
Based	on	our	knowledge	of	the	two	sides	of	the	brain,	we	know
that	Tina’s	son	was	experiencing	big	waves	of	right-brain	emotions
without	much	left-brain	logical	balance.	At	a	moment	like	this,	one
of	the	least	effective	things	Tina	could	do	would	be	to	jump	right	in
and	 defend	 herself	 (“Of	course	 I	 do	 nice	 things	 for	 you!”)	 or	 to
argue	with	her	son	about	his	faulty	logic	(“There’s	nothing	I	can	do
about	 making	 your	 birthday	 come	 sooner.	 As	 for	 the	 homework,
that’s	 just	 something	 that	 you’ve	 got	 to	 do”).	 This	 type	 of	 left-
brain,	 logical	 response	 would	 hit	 an	 unreceptive	 right-brain	 brick
wall	and	create	a	gulf	between	them.	After	all,	his	logical	left	brain
was	nowhere	to	be	found	at	that	moment.	So,	had	Tina	responded
with	 her	 left,	 her	 son	 would	 have	 felt	 like	 she	 didn’t	 understand
him	or	care	about	his	feelings.	He	was	in	a	right-brain,	nonrational,
emotional	�ood,	and	a	left-brain	response	would	have	been	a	lose-
lose	approach.
Even	though	it	was	practically	automatic	(and	very	tempting)	to
ask	him	“What	are	you	talking	about?”	or	to	tell	him	to	go	back	to
bed	 immediately,	 Tina	 stopped	 herself.	 Instead	 she	 used	 the
connect-and-redirect	 technique.	 She	 pulled	 him	 close,	 rubbed	 his
back,	and	with	a	nurturing	tone	of	voice,	said,	“Sometimes	it’s	just
really	 hard,	 isn’t	 it?	 I	 would	 never	 forget	 about	 you.	 You	 are
always	in	my	mind,	and	I	always	want	you	to	know	how	special
you	are	to	me.”	She	held	him	while	he	explained	that	he	sometimes
feels	that	his	younger	brother	gets	more	of	her	attention,	and	that
homework	takes	too	much	of	his	free	time.	As	he	spoke,	she	could
feel	 him	 relax	 and	 soften.	 He	 felt	 heard	 and	 cared	 for.	 Then	 she
brie�y	 addressed	 the	 speci�c	 issues	 he	 had	 brought	 up,	 since	 he
was	now	more	receptive	to	problem	solving	and	planning,	and	they
agreed	to	talk	more	in	the	morning.
In	 a	 moment	 like	 this,	 parents	 wonder	 whether	 their	 child	 is
really	in	need	or	just	trying	to	stall	bedtime.	Whole-brain	parenting
doesn’t	 mean	 letting	 yourself	 be	 manipulated	 or	 reinforcing	 bad
behavior.	On	the	contrary,	by	understanding	how	your	child’s	brain
works,	 you	 can	 create	 cooperation	 much	 more	 quickly	 and	 often
with	 far	 less	 drama.	 In	 this	 case,	 because	 Tina	 understood	 what
was	happening	in	her	son’s	brain,	she	saw	that	the	most	e�ective
response	was	to	connect	with	his	right	brain.	She	listened	to	him
and	comforted	him,	using	her	own	right	brain,	and	in	less	than	�ve
minutes	he	was	back	in	bed.	If,	on	the	other	hand,	she	had	played
the	heavy	and	come	down	hard	on	him	for	getting	out	of	bed,	using
left-brain	 logic	 and	 the	 letter	 of	 the	 law,	 they	 would	 have	 both
become	 increasingly	 upset—and	 it	 would	 have	 been	 a	 lot	 more
than	five	minutes	before	he	calmed	down	enough	to	sleep.
More	 important,	 Tina’s	 was	 a	 more	 caring	 and	 nurturing
response.	 Even	 though	 her	 son’s	 issues	 seemed	 silly	 and	 perhaps
illogical	to	her,	he	genuinely	felt	that	things	weren’t	fair	and	that
he	had	legitimate	complaints.	By	connecting	with	him,	right	brain
to	right	brain,	she	was	able	to	communicate	that	she	was	tuned	in
t o	how	 he	 was	 feeling.	 Even	 if	 he	 was	 stalling,	 this	 right-brain
response	was	the	most	e�ective	approach,	since	it	let	her	not	only
meet	 his	 need	 for	 connection,	 but	 also	 redirect	 him	 to	 bed	 more
quickly.	Instead	of	�ghting	against	the	huge	waves	of	his	emotional
flood,	Tina	surfed	them	by	responding	to	his	right	brain.
This	story	points	out	an	important	insight:	when	a	child	is	upset,
logic	 often	 won’t	 work	 until	 we	 have	 responded	 to	 the	 right	 brain’s
emotional	 needs.	 We	 call	 this	 emotional	 connection	 “attunement,”
which	 is	 how	 we	 connect	 deeply	 with	 another	 person	 and	 allow
them	 to	 “feel	 felt.”	 When	 parent	 and	 child	 are	 tuned	 in	 to	 each
other,	they	experience	a	sense	of	joining	together.
Tina’s	approach	with	her	son	is	one	that	we	call	the	“connect	and
redirect”	 method,	 and	 it	 begins	 with	 helping	 our	 kids	 “feel	 felt”
before	we	try	to	solve	problems	or	address	the	situation	logically.
Here’s	how	it	works:
Step	1:	Connect	with	the	Right
In	 our	 society,	 we’re	 trained	 to	 work	 things	 out	 using	 our	 words
and	 our	 logic.	 But	 when	 your	 four-year-old	 is	 absolutely	 furious
because	he	can’t	walk	on	the	ceiling	like	Spider-Man	(as	Tina’s	son
once	 was),	 that’s	 probably	 not	 the	 best	 time	 to	 give	 him	 an
introductory	lesson	in	the	laws	of	physics.	Or	when	your	eleven-
year-old	is	feeling	hurt	because	it	seems	that	his	sister	is	receiving
preferential	 treatment	 (as	 Dan’s	 son	 felt	 on	 occasion),	 the
appropriate	response	isn’t	to	get	out	a	scorecard	showing	that	you
reprimand	each	of	your	children	in	equal	measure.
Instead,	we	can	use	these	opportunities	to	realize	that	at	these
moments,	logic	isn’t	our	primary	vehicle	for	bringing	some	sort	of
sanity	to	the	conversation.	(Seems	counterintuitive,	doesn’t	it?)	It’s
also	 crucial	 to	 keep	 in	 mind	 that	 no	 matter	 how	 nonsensical	 and
frustrating	our	child’s	feelings	may	seem	to	us,	they	are	real	and
important	to	our	child.	It’s	vital	that	we	treat	them	as	such	in	our
response.
During	 Tina’s	 conversation	 with	 her	 son,	 she	 appealed	 to	 his
right	brain	by	acknowledging	his	feelings.	She	also	used	nonverbal
signals	 like	 physical	 touch,	 empathetic	 facial	 expressions,	 a
nurturing	 tone	 of	 voice,	 and	 nonjudgmental	 listening.	 In	 other
words,	she	used	her	right	brain	to	connect	and	communicate	with
his	right	brain.	This	right-to-right	attunement	helped	bring	his	brain
into	balance,	or	into	a	more	integrated	state.	Then	she	could	begin
to	appeal	to	her	son’s	left	brain	and	address	the	speci�c	issues	he
had	raised.	In	other	words,	then	it	was	time	for	step	2,	which	helps
to	integrate	the	left	and	the	right.
Step	2:	Redirect	with	the	Left
After	responding	with	the	right,	Tina	could	then	redirect	with	the
left.	 She	 could	 redirect	 him	 by	 logically	 explaining	 how	 hard	 she
works	to	be	fair,	by	promising	to	leave	a	note	while	he	slept,	and
by	strategizing	with	him	about	his	next	birthday	and	about	how	to
make	homework	more	fun.	(They	did	some	of	this	that	night,	but
most	of	it	came	the	following	day.)
Once	 she	 had	 connected	 with	 him	 right	 brain	 to	 right	 brain,	 it
was	much	easier	to	connect	left	to	left	and	deal	with	the	issues	in	a
rational	manner.	By	�rst	connecting	with	his	right	brain,	she	could
then	redirect	 with	 the	 left	 brain	 through	 logical	 explanation	 and
planning,	 which	 required	 that	 his	 left	 hemisphere	 join	 the
conversation.	This	approach	allowed	him	to	use	both	sides	of	his
brain	in	an	integrated,	coordinated	way.
We’re	not	saying	that	“connect	and	redirect”	will	always	do	the
trick.	 After	 all,	 there	 are	 times	 when	 a	 child	 is	 simply	 past	 the
point	of	no	return	and	the	emotional	waves	just	need	to	crash	until
the	storm	passes.	Or	the	child	may	simply	need	to	eat	or	get	some
sleep.	Like	Tina,	you	might	decide	to	wait	until	your	child	is	in	a
more	integrated	state	of	mind	to	talk	logically	with	him	about	his
feelings	and	behaviors.
We’re	 also	 not	 recommending	 permissiveness	 or	 letting	 your
boundaries	 slide	 simply	 because	 a	 child	 isn’t	 thinking	 logically.
Rules	 about	 respect	 and	 behavior	 aren’t	 thrown	 out	 the	 window
simply	 because	 a	 child’s	 left	 hemisphere	 is	 disengaged.	 For
example,	whatever	behavior	is	inappropriate	in	your	family—being
disrespectful,	 hurting	 someone,	 throwing	 things—should	 remain
o�-limits	even	in	moments	of	high	emotion.	You	may	need	to	stop
destructive	 behavior	 and	 remove	 your	 child	 from	 the	 situation
before	you	begin	to	connect	and	redirect.	But	with	the	whole-brain
approach,	we	understand	that	it’s	generally	a	good	idea	to	discuss
misbehavior	and	its	consequences	after	the	child	has	calmed	down,
since	 moments	 of	 emotional	 �ooding	 are	 not	 the	 best	 times	 for
lessons	to	be	learned.	A	child	can	be	much	more	receptive	once	the
left	 brain	 is	 working	 again,	 and	 discipline	 can	 therefore	 be	 much
more	e�ective.	It’s	as	if	you	are	a	lifeguard	who	swims	out,	puts
your	arms	around	your	child,	and	helps	him	to	shore	before	telling
him	not	to	swim	out	so	far	next	time.
The	key	here	is	that	when	your	child	is	drowning	in	a	right-brain
emotional	�ood,	you’ll	do	yourself	(and	your	child)	a	big	favor	if
you	 connect	 before	 you	 redirect.	 This	 approach	 can	 be	 a	 life
preserver	that	helps	keep	your	child’s	head	above	water,	and	keeps
you	from	being	pulled	under	along	with	him.
Whole-Brain	Strategy	#2:
Name	It	to	Tame	It:	Telling	Stories	to	Calm	Big	Emotions
A	 toddler	 falls	 and	 scrapes	 an	 elbow.	 A	 kindergartner	 loses	 a
beloved	 pet.	 A	 �fth-grader	 faces	 a	 bully	 at	 school.	 When	 a	 child
experiences	 painful,	 disappointing,	 or	 scary	 moments,	 it	 can	 be
overwhelming,	 with	 big	 emotions	 and	 bodily	 sensations	 �ooding
the	right	brain.	When	this	happens,	we	as	parents	can	help	bring
the	left	hemisphere	into	the	picture	so	that	the	child	can	begin	to
understand	what’s	happening.	One	of	the	best	ways	to	promote	this
type	of	integration	is	to	help	retell	the	story	of	the	frightening	or
painful	experience.
Bella,	 for	 instance,	 was	 nine	 years	 old	 when	 the	 toilet
over�owed	when	she	�ushed,	and	the	experience	of	watching	the
water	 rise	 and	 pour	 onto	 the	 �oor	 left	 her	 unwilling	 (and
practically	 unable)	 to	 �ush	 the	 toilet	 afterward.	 When	 Bella’s
father,	Doug,	learned	about	the	“name	it	to	tame	it”	technique,	he
sat	 down	 with	 his	 daughter	 and	 retold	 the	 story	 of	 the	 time	 the
toilet	over�owed.	He	allowed	her	to	tell	as	much	of	the	story	as
she	could	and	helped	to	�ll	in	the	details,	including	the	lingering
fear	 she	 had	 felt	 about	 �ushing	 since	 that	 experience.	 After
retelling	 the	 story	 several	 times,	 Bella’s	 fears	 lessened	 and
eventually	went	away.
Why	was	retelling	the	story	so	e�ective?	Essentially,	what	Doug
did	was	to	help	his	daughter	bring	her	left	brain	and	her	right	brain
together	so	she	could	make	sense	of	what	had	happened.	When	she
talked	 through	 the	 moment	 the	 water	 had	 started	 spilling	 on	 the
�oor	and	how	she’d	felt	worried	and	afraid,	her	two	hemispheres
were	working	together	in	an	integrated	way.	She	engaged	her	left
brain	by	putting	the	details	in	order	and	the	experience	into	words,
and	then	brought	in	her	right	brain	by	revisiting	the	emotions	she
felt.	 In	 this	 way,	 Doug	 helped	 his	 daughter	name	 her	 fears	 and
emotions	so	that	she	could	then	tame	them.
There	may	be	times	when	our	kids	won’t	want	to	tell	the	story
when	we	ask	them	to.	We	need	to	respect	their	desires	about	how
and	when	to	talk—especially	because	pressuring	them	to	share	will
only	back�re.	(Think	about	the	times	you	prefer	solitude	and	don’t
feel	like	talking—does	prodding	ever	entice	you	to	talk	and	share
your	 inner	 feelings?)	 Instead,	 we	 can	 gently	 encourage	 them	 by
beginning	 the	 story	 and	 asking	 them	 to	 �ll	 in	 the	 details,	 and	 if
they’re	not	interested,	we	can	give	them	space	and	talk	later.
Your	 child	 is	 more	 likely	 to	 be	 responsive	 if	 you	 are	 strategic
about	when	you	initiate	this	type	of	conversation.	Make	sure	you
are	 both	 in	 a	 good	 frame	 of	 mind.	 Seasoned	 parents	 and	 child
therapists	 will	 also	 tell	 you	 that	 some	 of	 the	 best	 conversations
with	 children	 take	 place	 while	 something	 else	 is	 happening.
Children	 are	 much	 more	 apt	 to	 share	 and	 talk	 while	 building
something,	 playing	 cards,	 or	 riding	 in	 the	 car	 than	 when	 you	 sit
down	 and	 look	 them	 right	 in	 the	 face	 and	 ask	 them	 to	 open	 up.
Another	 approach	 you	 can	 take	 if	 your	 child	 doesn’t	 feel	 like
talking	is	to	ask	her	to	draw	a	picture	of	the	event	or,	if	she’s	old
enough,	write	about	it.	If	you	sense	that	she	is	reluctant	to	talk	to
you,	 encourage	 her	 to	 talk	 to	 someone	 else—a	 friend,	 another
adult,	or	even	a	sibling	who	will	be	a	good	listener.
Parents	know	how	powerful	storytelling	can	be	when	it	comes	to
distracting	their	kids	or	calming	them	down,	but	most	people	don’t
realize	the	science	behind	this	powerful	force.	The	right	side	of	our
brain	processes	our	emotions	and	autobiographical	memories,	but
our	 left	 side	 is	 what	 makes	 sense	 of	 these	 feelings	 and
recollections.	Healing	from	a	di�cult	experience	emerges	when	the
left	side	works	with	the	right	to	tell	our	life	stories.	When	children
learn	 to	 pay	 attention	 to	 and	 share	 their	 own	 stories,	 they	 can
respond	in	healthy	ways	to	everything	from	a	scraped	elbow	to	a
major	loss	or	trauma.
What	 kids	 often	 need,	 especially	 when	 they	 experience	 strong
emotions,	 is	 to	 have	 someone	 help	 them	 use	 their	 left	 brain	 to
make	sense	of	what’s	going	on—to	put	things	in	order	and	to	name
these	big	and	scary	right-brain	feelings	so	they	can	deal	with	them
e�ectively.	 This	 is	 what	 storytelling	 does:	 it	 allows	 us	 to
understand	 ourselves	 and	 our	 world	 by	 using	 both	 our	 left	 and
right	 hemispheres	 together.	 To	 tell	 a	 story	 that	 makes	 sense,	 the
left	brain	must	put	things	in	order,	using	words	and	logic.	The	right
brain	contributes	the	bodily	sensations,	raw	emotions,	and	personal
memories,	so	we	can	see	the	whole	picture	and	communicate	our
experience.	This	is	the	scienti�c	explanation	behind	why	journaling
and	talking	about	a	di�cult	event	can	be	so	powerful	in	helping	us
heal.	In	fact,	research	shows	that	merely	assigning	a	name	or	label
to	what	we	feel	literally	calms	down	the	activity	of	the	emotional
circuitry	in	the	right	hemisphere.
For	 this	 same	 reason,	 it’s	 important	 for	 kids	 of	 all	 ages	 to	 tell
their	stories,	as	it	helps	them	try	to	understand	their	emotions	and
the	 events	 that	 occur	 in	 their	 lives.	 Sometimes	 parents	 avoid
talking	 about	 upsetting	 experiences,	 thinking	 that	 doing	 so	 will
reinforce	 their	 children’s	 pain	 or	 make	 things	 worse.	 Actually,
telling	the	story	is	often	exactly	what	children	need,	both	to	make
sense	of	the	event	and	to	move	on	to	a	place	where	they	can	feel
better	 about	 what	 happened.	 (Remember	 Marianna’s	 son,	 Marco,
from	 the	 “Eea	 woo	 woo”	 story	 in	 chapter	 1?)	 The	 drive	 to
understand	why	things	happen	to	us	is	so	strong	that	the	brain	will
continue	to	try	making	sense	of	an	experience	until	it	succeeds.	As
parents,	we	can	help	this	process	along	through	storytelling.
That’s	 what	 Thomas	 did	 with	 Katie,	 the	 preschooler	 who	 was
screaming	about	dying	if	her	father	left	her	at	school.	Even	though
he	felt	frustrated	with	the	situation,	he	resisted	the	urge	to	dismiss
and	deny	Katie’s	experiences.	Because	of	what	he	had	learned,	he
recognized	 that	 his	 daughter’s	 brain	 was	 linking	 several	 events
together:	 being	 dropped	 o�	 at	 school,	 getting	 sick,	 having	 her
father	leave,	and	feeling	afraid.	As	a	result,	when	it	came	time	to
pack	up	and	go	to	school,	her	brain	and	body	started	telling	her,
“Bad	idea:	school	=	feeling	sick	=	Dad	gone	=	afraid.”	From	that
perspective,	it	made	sense	that	she	didn’t	want	to	go	to	school.
Realizing	this,	Thomas	used	his	knowledge	about	the	brain’s	two
hemispheres.	He	knew	that	small	children	like	Katie	are	typically
right-hemisphere	 dominant	 and	 haven’t	 mastered	 their	 ability	 to
use	 logic	 and	 words	 to	 express	 feelings.	 Katie	 felt	 the	 strong
emotions,	 but	 she	 wasn’t	 able	 to	 understand	 and	 communicate
them	clearly.	As	a	result,	they	had	become	overpowering.	He	also
knew	that	autobiographical	memory	is	stored	in	the	right	side	of
the	brain,	and	understood	that	the	details	of	her	getting	sick	had
become	linked	in	her	memory	and	caused	her	right	hemisphere	to
shift	into	overdrive.
Once	 Thomas	 grasped	 all	 of	 this,	 he	 knew	 he	 needed	 to	 help
Katie	make	sense	of	those	emotions	by	using	her	left	hemisphere—
by	 bringing	 in	 logic,	 putting	 the	 events	 in	 order,	 and	 assigning
words	to	her	feelings.	The	way	he	did	this	was	by	helping	her	tell	a
story	about	what	had	happened	that	day	so	that	she	could	use	both
sides	 of	 her	 brain	 together.	 He	 told	 her,	 “I	 know	 you’ve	 been
having	a	hard	time	going	to	school	since	you	got	sick.	Let’s	try	to
remember	the	day	you	felt	sick	at	school.	First,	we	got	ready	for
school,	didn’t	we?	Remember,	you	wanted	to	wear	your	red	pants,
we	had	wa�es	with	blueberries,	and	then	you	brushed	your	teeth?
We	got	to	school	and	we	hugged	and	said	goodbye.	You	started	to
paint	at	the	activity	table	and	I	waved	bye	to	you.	And	then	what
happened	after	I	left?”
Katie	responded	that	she	got	sick.	Thomas	continued,	“Right.	And
I	 know	 that	 didn’t	 feel	 good,	 did	 it?	 But	 then	 Ms.	 LaRussa	 took
really	good	care	of	you	and	knew	you	needed	Daddy,	so	she	called
me	and	I	came	right	away.	Aren’t	you	lucky	to	have	a	teacher	that
took	 care	 of	 you	 until	 Daddy	 could	 come?	 And	 then	 what
happened?	 I	 took	 care	 of	 you	 and	 you	 felt	 better.”	 Thomas	 then
emphasized	that	he	came	right	away	and	that	everything	was	OK,
and	he	assured	Katie	that	he	would	always	be	there	anytime	she
needed	him.
By	 putting	 these	 narrative	 details	 in	 order	 like	 this,	 Thomas
allowed	 his	 daughter	 to	 begin	 to	 make	 sense	 of	 what	 she	 was
experiencing	with	her	emotions	and	in	her	body.	He	then	began	to
help	her	create	some	new	associations	that	school	is	safe	and	fun,
reminding	her	of	various	aspects	of	her	school	that	she	loved.	They
wrote	 and	 illustrated	 a	 book	 together	 that	 told	 the	 story	 and
featured	 her	 favorite	 places	 in	 her	 classroom.	 As	 kids	 often	 will,
Katie	wanted	to	read	her	homemade	book	over	and	over.
Before	long,	she	regained	her	love	of	school,	and	the	experience
didn’t	have	such	power	over	her	anymore.	In	fact,	she	learned	that
she	could	overcome	fear	with	the	support	of	the	people	who	love
her.	 As	 Katie	 grows,	 her	 father	 will	 continue	 to	 help	 her	 make
sense	 of	 her	 experiences;	 this	 storytelling	 process	 will	 become	 a
natural	 way	 for	 her	 to	 deal	 with	 di�cult	 situations,	 giving	 her	 a
powerful	 tool	 for	 dealing	 with	 adversity	 into	 adulthood	 and
throughout	her	life.
Even	 children	 much	 younger	 than	 Katie—as	 young	 as	 ten	 to
twelve	 months—respond	 well	 to	 telling	 stories.	 For	 example,
imagine	 a	 toddler	 who’s	 fallen	 down	 and	 skinned	 her	 knee.	 Her
right	 brain,	 which	 is	 completely	 in	 the	 present	 moment	 and	 in
touch	 with	 her	 body	 and	 fear,	 feels	 pain.	 On	 some	 level,	 she
worries	that	the	pain	may	never	go	away.	When	the	mother	retells
the	story	of	the	fall,	putting	words	and	order	to	the	experience,	she
helps	 her	 daughter	 engage	 and	 develop	 her	 left	 brain,	 explaining
what	happened—she	simply	fell	down—so	that	she	can	understand
why	she’s	hurting.
Don’t	 underestimate	 the	 power	 of	 a	 story	 to	 hold	 a	 child’s
attention.	 Try	 this	 if	 you	 have	 a	 little	 one—you’ll	 be	 amazed	 at
how	 helpful	 it	 can	 be,	 and	 how	 eager	 he’ll	 be	 to	 help	 tell	 future
stories	when	he’s	been	hurt	or	feels	afraid.
This	“name	it	to	tame	it”	technique	is	just	as	powerful	with	older
kids.	One	mother	we	know,	Laura,	used	it	with	her	son,	Jack,	who
had	been	in	a	minor	(but	still	scary)	biking	accident	when	he	was
ten	 and	 felt	 nervous	 anytime	 he	 thought	 about	 going	 out	 on	 a
bicycle.	Here’s	how	she	helped	him	tell	the	story	so	that	he	could
begin	to	understand	what	was	going	on	inside.
LAURA:				 Do	you	remember	what	happened	when	you	fell?
JACK:
I	was	looking	at	you	when	we	were	crossing	the	street.
And	I	didn’t	see	the	grate	of	the	sewer.
LAURA:
And	what	happened	next?
JACK:
My	wheel	got	caught	and	the	bike	fell	over	on	me.
LAURA:
And	that	was	frightening,	wasn’t	it?
JACK:
Yeah,	I	didn’t	know	what	to	do	…	I	just	went	down	in	the
street,	and	I	couldn’t	even	see	what	was	happening.
LAURA:
That	must	have	been	scary,	to	have	something	happen	out
of	nowhere.	Do	you	remember	what	happened	next?
Laura	 went	 on	 to	 help	 Jack	 recount	 the	 whole	 experience.
Together	they	discussed	how,	in	the	end,	the	ordeal	was	resolved
by	some	tears,	comforting,	Band-Aids,	and	bike	repairs.	Then	they
talked	 about	 watching	 out	 for	 sewer	 grates	 and	 being	 aware	 of
oncoming	tra�c,	which	helped	Jack	free	himself	from	some	of	the
feelings	of	helplessness.
The	 details	 of	 a	 conversation	 like	 this	 will	 obviously	 change
along	with	the	situation.	But	notice	how	Laura	drew	the	story	out
of	 her	 son,	 letting	 him	 take	 an	 active	 role	 in	 the	 storytelling
process.	She	acted	primarily	as	a	facilitator,	helping	get	the	facts	of
the	 event	 straight.	 This	 is	 how	 stories	 empower	 us	 to	 move
forward	 and	 master	 the	 moments	 when	 we	 feel	 out	 of	 control.
When	we	can	give	words	to	our	frightening	and	painful	experiences
—when	 we	 literally	come	to	terms	with	them—they	often	become
much	less	frightening	and	painful.	When	we	help	our	children	name
their	pain	and	their	fears,	we	help	them	tame	them.
Whole-Brain	Kids:
Teach	Your	Kids	About	the	Two	Sides	of	the	Brain
In	this	chapter,	we	gave	you	several	examples	of	how	to	help	your
kids	 integrate	 their	 left	 and	 right	 brain.	 It	 can	 also	 be	 helpful	 to
talk	to	your	children,	and	explain	to	them	some	basics	about	the
information	 we’ve	 just	 covered.	 To	 help	 you	 along,	 here’s
something	you	can	read	with	your	kids.	We’ve	written	it	with	�ve-
to-nine-year-olds	 in	 mind,	 but	 you	 should	 make	 it	 your	 own	 and
adapt	it	to	fit	the	age	and	developmental	stage	of	each	child.
Integrating	 Ourselves:	 Connecting	 Our	 Left	 and	 Right
Brain
Now	that	you	know	more	about	the	left	and	right	sides	of	the
brain,	 think	 about	 your	 own	 integration.	 When	 it	 comes	 to
parenting,	 are	 you	 too	 right-brain	 dominant?	 Do	 you
frequently	 get	 swept	 up	 in	 emotional	 �oods,	 leaving	 your
children	 drenched	 with	 your	 own	 chaos	 and	 fear?	 Or	 maybe
your	 tendency	 is	 to	 live	 in	 a	 left-brain	 emotional	 desert,	 so
you	are	rigid	in	your	reactions	and	have	a	hard	time	reading
and	responding	to	your	children’s	emotions	and	needs?
Here	are	the	words	of	a	mom	we	know	who	realized	that
she	 was	 primarily	 interacting	 with	 her	 young	 son	 using	 only
one	side	of	her	own	brain:
I	was	brought	up	in	a	military	family.	Needless	to	say,	I
am	 not	 very	 touchy-feely!	 I’m	 a	 veterinarian	 and	 a
trained	 problem	 solver,	 which	 doesn’t	 help	 me	 in	 the
empathy	department.
When	my	son	would	cry	or	become	upset,	I	would	try
to	get	him	to	settle	down	so	I	could	help	him	solve	the
problem.	
This	
was	
not	
helpful	
and	
sometimes
exacerbated	the	crying,	so	I	would	walk	away	and	wait
until	he	calmed	down.
Recently,	
I	
learned	
about	
trying	
to	
connect
emotionally	 �rst—right	 brain	 to	 right	 brain,	 which	 was
totally	 foreign	 to	 me.	 Now	 I	 hold	 my	 son,	 listen,	 and
even	try	and	help	him	tell	his	story,	using	both	the	left
and	 right	 brain	 together.	 Then	 we	 talk	 about	 the
behavior	or	solve	the	problem.	Now	I	try	to	remember	to
connect	first	and	solve	second.
It	 took	 some	 practice,	 but	 when	 I	 related	 to	 my	 son
emotionally	 �rst,	 using	 my	 right	 brain,	 along	 with	 my
left,	instead	of	using	only	my	left,	everything	else	went
more	smoothly	and	our	relationship	in	general	improved
as	well.
This	mother	realized	that	by	ignoring	parts	of	her	own	right
brain,	 she	 was	 missing	 out	 on	 important	 opportunities	 to
connect	with	her	son	and	to	enhance	the	development	of	his
right	brain.
One	of	the	best	ways	to	promote	integration	in	our	children
is	 to	 become	 better	 integrated	 ourselves.	 (We’ll	 discuss	 this
more	 fully	 in	chapter	 6	 when	 we	 explain	 mirror	 neurons.)
When	 right	 and	 left	 brain	 are	 integrated,	 we	 can	 approach
parenting	from	both	a	grounded,	left-brained,	rational	place—
one	that	lets	us	make	important	decisions,	solve	problems,	and
enforce	 boundaries—and	 from	 a	 right-brained,	 emotionally
connected	 place	 where	 we’re	 aware	 of	 the	 feelings	 and
sensations	 of	 our	 body	 and	 emotions,	 so	 we	 can	 lovingly
respond	to	our	children’s	needs.	Then	we’ll	be	parenting	with
our	whole	brain.
CHAPTER	3
Building	the	Staircase	of	the	Mind
Integrating	the	Upstairs	and	Downstairs	Brain
One	afternoon	Jill	heard	yelling	and	commotion	in	the	bedroom	of
her	 six-year-old,	 Grant.	 Four-year-old	 Gracie	 had	 found	 her
brother’s	 treasure	 box	 and	 taken	 his	 “most	 rarest	 crystal,”	 which
she	 then	 lost.	 Jill	 arrived	 just	 in	 time	 to	 hear	 Gracie	 say,	 in	 her
most	spiteful	voice,	“It’s	just	a	dumb	rock	and	I’m	glad	I	lost	it!”
Jill	looked	at	her	young	son,	�sts	clenched	and	face	turning	red.
You’ve	probably	experienced	just	such	a	moment,	where	a	situation
with	 your	 child	 is	 delicately	 balanced	 and	 is	 about	 to	 turn	 ugly.
Things	could	still	be	salvaged	and	tip	toward	a	good	and	peaceful
resolution.	Or	they	could	tilt	in	the	other	direction,	devolving	into
chaos,	anarchy,	even	violence.
And	it	all	depends	on	your	little	darling	controlling	an	impulse.
Calming	some	big	feelings.	Making	a	good	decision.
Yikes.
In	 this	 case,	 Jill	 immediately	 saw	 signs	 of	 what	 was	 coming:
Grant	 was	 losing	 control	 and	 was	not	 going	 to	 make	 a	 good
decision.	She	saw	the	fury	in	his	eyes	and	heard	the	beginnings	of	a
barbaric	growl	begin	to	emerge	from	his	throat.	She	matched	him,
step	for	step,	as	he	raced	across	the	few	feet	between	himself	and
his	 sister.	 Fortunately,	 Jill	 was	 quicker	 and	 intercepted	 Grant
before	he	reached	Gracie.	She	picked	him	up	and	held	him	close	as
his	punches	and	kicks	�ailed	wildly	in	the	air,	Grant	screaming	all
the	 while.	 When	 he	 �nally	 stopped	 �ghting,	 Jill	 set	 him	 down.
Through	his	tears	he	looked	at	his	sister,	who	actually	adored	and
idolized	 him,	 and	 calmly	 uttered	 the	 phrase,	 “You’re	 the	 worst
sister	in	the	world.”
As	 Jill	 told	 Dan	 this	 story,	 she	 explained	 that	 this	 last	 verbal
torpedo	 had	 hit	 its	 mark	 and	 produced	 the	 dramatic	 tears	 from
Gracie	that	Grant	had	hoped	for.	Still,	Jill	was	glad	that	she	had
been	there,	or	her	son	likely	would	have	caused	physical,	not	just
emotional,	pain.	The	question	she	asked	Dan	is	one	that	parents	ask
us	frequently:	I	can’t	be	with	my	kids	every	second	of	the	day.	How	do
I	teach	them	to	do	the	right	thing	and	control	themselves	even	when	I’m
not	around?
One	 of	 the	 most	 important	 skills	 we	 can	 teach	 our	 kids	 is	 to
make	good	decisions	in	high-emotion	situations	like	the	one	Grant
faced	 here.	 We	 want	 them	 to	 pause	 before	 acting,	 to	 consider
consequences,	to	think	about	the	feelings	of	others,	to	make	ethical
and	moral	judgments.	Sometimes	they	come	through	with	the	kind
of	behavior	that	makes	us	proud.	And	sometimes	they	don’t.
What	is	it	that	makes	our	kids	choose	their	actions	so	wisely	in
certain	moments	and	so	poorly	in	others?	Why	do	certain	situations
leave	 us	 patting	 our	 children	 on	 the	 back,	 and	 others	 leave	 us
throwing	 our	 hands	 in	 the	 air?	 Well,	 there	 are	 some	 pretty	 good
reasons	based	on	what’s	going	on	in	the	higher	and	lower	parts	of	a
child’s	brain.
THE	MENTAL	STAIRCASE:	INTEGRATING	THE	UPSTAIRS	AND	DOWNSTAIRS	BRAIN
We	 can	 talk	 about	 the	 brain	 in	 many	 ways.	 In	chapter	 2,	 we
focused	 on	 its	 two	 hemispheres,	 the	 left	 and	 the	 right.	 Now	 we
want	to	look	at	it	from	top	to	bottom,	or	actually	from	bottom	to
top.
Imagine	that	your	brain	is	a	house,	with	both	a	downstairs	and
an	upstairs.	The	downstairs	brain	includes	the	brain	stem	and	the
limbic	 region,	 which	 are	 located	 in	 the	 lower	 parts	 of	 the	 brain,
from	 the	 top	 of	 your	 neck	 to	 about	 the	 bridge	 of	 your	 nose.
Scientists	 talk	 about	 these	 lower	 areas	 as	 being	 more	 primitive
because	they	are	responsible	for	basic	functions	(like	breathing	and
blinking),	for	innate	reactions	and	impulses	(like	�ght	and	�ight),
and	 for	 strong	 emotions	 (like	 anger	 and	 fear).	 Whenever	 you
instinctually	�inch	because	a	Little	League	foul	ball	�ies	into	the
stands,	your	downstairs	brain	is	doing	its	job.	The	same	goes	for
when	your	face	goes	red	with	fury	because,	after	twenty	minutes
of	convincing	your	kindergartner	that	the	dentist’s	o�ce	won’t	be
scary,	the	dental	assistant	enters	the	room	and	announces	in	front
of	 your	 daughter,	 “We’ll	 need	 to	 give	 her	 a	 shot	 to	 numb	 her.”
Your	anger—along	with	other	strong	emotions	and	bodily	functions
and	instincts—springs	from	your	downstairs	brain.	It’s	like	the	�rst
�oor	of	a	house,	where	so	many	of	a	family’s	basic	needs	are	met.
There	 you’ll	 almost	 always	 �nd	 a	 kitchen,	 a	 dining	 room,	 a
bathroom,	and	so	on.	Basic	necessities	get	taken	care	of	downstairs.
Your	upstairs	brain	is	completely	di�erent.	It’s	made	up	of	the
cerebral	cortex	and	its	various	parts—particularly	the	ones	directly
behind	your	forehead,	including	what’s	called	the	middle	prefrontal
cortex.	Unlike	your	more	basic	downstairs	brain,	the	upstairs	brain
is	 more	 evolved	 and	 can	 give	 you	 a	 fuller	 perspective	 on	 your
world.	You	might	imagine	it	as	a	light-�lled	second-story	study	or
library	full	of	windows	and	skylights	that	allow	you	to	see	things
more	 clearly.	 This	 is	 where	 more	 intricate	 mental	 processes	 take
place,	 like	 thinking,	 imagining,	 and	 planning.	 Whereas	 the
downstairs	 brain	 is	 primitive,	 the	 upstairs	 brain	 is	 highly
sophisticated,	 controlling	 some	 of	 your	 most	 important	 higher-
order	 and	 analytical	 thinking.	 Because	 of	 its	 sophistication	 and
complexity,	 it	 is	 responsible	 for	 producing	 many	 of	 the
characteristics	we	hope	to	see	in	our	kids:
	Sound	decision	making	and	planning
	Control	over	emotions	and	body
	Self-understanding
	Empathy
	Morality
A	 child	 whose	 upstairs	 brain	 is	 properly	 functioning	 will
demonstrate	 some	 of	 the	 most	 important	 characteristics	 of	 a
mature	 and	 healthy	 human	 being.	 We’re	 not	 saying	 she’ll	 be
superhuman	or	never	display	childish	behavior.	But	when	a	child’s
upstairs	 brain	 is	 working	 well,	 she	 can	 regulate	 her	 emotions,
consider	 consequences,	 think	 before	 acting,	 and	 consider	 how
others	feel—all	of	which	will	help	her	thrive	in	di�erent	areas	of
her	life,	as	well	as	help	her	family	survive	day-to-day	difficulties.
As	 you	 might	 expect,	 a	 person’s	 brain	 works	 best	 when	 the
upstairs	 and	 downstairs	 are	 integrated	 with	 each	 other.	 So	 a
parent’s	 goal	 should	 be	 to	 help	 build	 and	 reinforce	 the
metaphorical	 stairway	 that	 connects	 the	 child’s	 upper	 and	 lower
brain	so	that	the	two	can	work	as	a	team.	When	a	fully	functioning
staircase	 is	 in	 place,	 the	 upper	 and	 lower	 parts	 of	 the	 brain	 are
vertically	 integrated.	 That	means	 that	 the	 upstairs	 can	 monitor	 the
actions	 of	 the	 downstairs	 and	 help	 calm	 the	 strong	 reactions,
impulses,	 and	 emotions	 that	 originate	 there.	 But	 vertical
integration	works	in	the	other	direction,	too,	with	the	downstairs
brain	 and	 the	 body	 (the	 house’s	 foundation)	 making	 important
“bottom-up”	 contributions.	 After	 all,	 we	 don’t	 want	 signi�cant
upstairs	decisions	being	made	in	some	sort	of	vacuum	that’s	devoid
of	input	from	our	emotions,	our	instincts,	and	our	bodies.	Instead,
we	 need	 to	 consider	 our	 emotional	 and	 physical	 feelings—which
originate	 downstairs—before	 using	 the	 upstairs	 to	 decide	 on	 a
course	 of	 action.	 Once	 again,	 then,	 integration	 allows	 for	 a	 free
�ow	 between	 the	 lower	 and	 higher	 parts	 of	 our	 brain.	 It	 helps
build	the	stairway,	so	that	all	the	di�erent	parts	of	our	brain	can
be	coordinated	and	work	together	as	a	whole.
THE	UNFINISHED	UPSTAIRS:	SETTING	APPROPRIATE	EXPECTATIONS	FOR	YOUR	KIDS
Even	though	we	will	want	to	help	build	this	metaphorical	staircase
in	 our	 child’s	 brain,	 there	 are	 two	 important	 reasons	 to	 maintain
realistic	 expectations	 when	 it	 comes	 to	 integration.	 The	 �rst	 is
developmental:	while	the	downstairs	brain	is	well	developed	even
at	birth,	the	upstairs	brain	isn’t	fully	mature	until	a	person	reaches
his	mid-twenties.	In	fact,	it’s	one	of	the	last	parts	of	the	brain	to
develop.	The	upstairs	brain	remains	under	massive	construction	for
the	�rst	few	years	of	life,	then	during	the	teen	years	undergoes	an
extensive	remodel	that	lasts	into	adulthood.
Just	imagine	the	downstairs	of	a	house	that	is	complete	and	fully
furnished,	but	when	you	look	up	at	the	second	�oor,	you	see	that	it
is	un�nished	and	littered	with	construction	tools.	You	can	even	see
patches	of	the	sky	where	the	roof	hasn’t	been	completed	yet.	That’s
your	child’s	upstairs	brain—a	work	in	progress.
This	 is	 really	 important	 information	 for	 parents	 to	 understand,
because	 it	 means	 that	 all	 of	 the	 abilities	 on	 the	 list	 above—the
behaviors	and	skills	we	want	and	expect	our	kids	to	demonstrate,
like	sound	decision	making,	control	of	their	emotions	and	bodies,
empathy,	 self-understanding,	 and	 morality—are	 dependent	 on	 a
part	of	 their	 brain	 that	 hasn’t	 fully	 developed	 yet.	 Since	 the
upstairs	 brain	 is	 still	 under	 construction,	 it	 isn’t	 capable	 of	 fully
functioning	 all	 the	 time,	 meaning	 that	 it	 can’t	 be	 integrated	 with
the	downstairs	brain	and	consistently	work	at	its	best.	As	a	result,
kids	are	prone	to	getting	“trapped	downstairs,”	without	the	use	of
their	 upstairs	 brain,	 which	 results	 in	 them	 �ying	 o�	 the	 handle,
making	poor	decisions,	and	showing	a	general	lack	of	empathy	and
self-understanding.
So	that’s	the	�rst	reason	kids	often	aren’t	very	good	at	using	the
higher	and	lower	parts	of	the	brain	together:	their	upstairs	brain	is
still	 developing.	 The	 other	 main	 reason	 has	 to	 do	 with	 one
particular	part	of	the	downstairs	brain,	the	amygdala.
THE	BABY	GATE	OF	THE	MIND:	MY	AMYGDALA	MADE	ME	DO	IT
Our	 amygdala	 (pronounced	uh-MIG-duh-luh)	 is	 about	 the	 size	 and
shape	of	an	almond	and	is	part	of	the	limbic	area,	which	resides	in
the	downstairs	brain.	The	amygdala’s	job	is	to	quickly	process	and
express	emotions,	especially	anger	and	fear.	This	little	mass	of	gray
matter	 is	 the	 watchdog	 of	 the	 brain,	 remaining	 always	 alert	 for
times	we	might	be	threatened.	When	it	does	sense	danger,	it	can
completely	 take	 over,	 or	 hijack,	 the	 upstairs	 brain.	 That’s	 what
allows	 us	 to	act	 before	 we	think.	 It’s	 the	 part	 of	 the	 brain	 that
instructs	your	arm	to	stretch	out	to	protect	your	passenger	when
you’re	driving	and	have	to	stop	short.	It’s	the	part	of	the	brain	that
encourages	you	to	scream	“Stop!”	as	was	the	case	when	Dan	was
hiking	with	his	young	son,	even	before	he	was	consciously	aware
that	there	was	a	rattlesnake	a	few	feet	up	the	trail.
Of	course,	there	are	de�nitely	times	when	it’s	good	to	act	before
thinking.	In	this	situation,	the	last	thing	Dan	needed	was	to	have
his	upstairs	brain	go	through	a	series	of	higher-order	maneuvers	or
perform	 some	 sort	 of	 cost-bene�t	 analysis:	Oh	no!	There’s	a	snake
up	ahead	of	my	son.	Now	would	be	a	good	time	to	warn	him.	I	wish	I
had	warned	him	a	couple	of	seconds	ago,	rather	than	going	through	this
series	of	cogitations	that	led	me	to	the	decision	to	warn	him.	Instead,	he
needed	 his	 downstairs	 brain—in	 this	 case,	 his	 amygdala—to	 take
over	and	do	exactly	what	it	did:	cause	him	to	call	out	even	before
he	consciously	realized	what	he	was	doing.
Clearly,	acting	before	thinking	is	a	good	thing	when	we’re	in	a
situation	like	Dan’s,	or	when	we’re	in	danger	in	some	other	way.
But	 acting	 or	 reacting	 before	 we	 think	isn’t	 usually	 so	 good	 in
normal,	everyday	situations,	like	when	we	storm	from	our	car	and
yell	 at	 another	 parent	 for	 breaking	 the	 no-waiting	 rule	 in	 the
carpool	 pickup	 circle.	 As	 we’ll	 explain	 in	 the	 “Whole-Brain	 Kids”
section	below,	that’s	what	we	call	“�ipping	our	lid,”	and	it’s	how
the	amygdala	can	get	us	into	trouble:	it	takes	over	and	relieves	the
upstairs	brain	from	its	duties.	When	we’re	not	truly	in	danger,	we
want	to	think	before	acting,	instead	of	the	other	way	around.
We	want	our	kids	to	do	the	same.	The	problem,	though,	is	that
especially	in	children,	the	amygdala	frequently	�res	up	and	blocks
the	stairway	connecting	the	upstairs	and	downstairs	brain.	It’s	as	if
a	baby	gate	has	been	latched	at	the	bottom	of	the	stairs,	making
the	 upstairs	 brain	 inaccessible.	 This	 of	 course	 further	 compounds
the	other	problem	we	just	discussed:	not	only	is	the	upstairs	brain
under	 construction,	 but	 even	 the	 part	 of	 it	 that	can	 function
becomes	inaccessible	during	moments	of	high	emotion	or	stress.
When	your	three-year-old	erupts	in	anger	because	there	are	no
orange	Popsicles	left	in	the	freezer,	his	downstairs	brain,	including
the	 brain	 stem	 and	 amygdala,	 has	 sprung	 into	 action	 and	 latched
the	 baby	 gate.	 This	 primitive	 part	 of	 his	 brain	 has	 received	 an
intense	surge	of	energy,	leaving	him	literally	unable	to	act	calmly
and	 reasonably.	 Massive	 brain	 resources	 have	 rushed	 to	 his
downstairs	 brain,	 leaving	 little	 to	 power	 his	 upstairs	 brain.	 As	 a
result,	 no	 matter	 how	 many	 times	 you	 tell	 him	 that	 you	 have
plenty	of	purple	Popsicles	(which	he	liked	better	than	orange	last
time	 anyway),	 he’s	 probably	 not	 going	 to	 listen	 to	 reason	 in	 this
moment.	 He’s	 much	 more	 likely	 to	 throw	 something	 or	 yell	 at
anyone	nearby.
As	you	know	if	you’ve	found	yourself	in	this	situation,	the	best
way	to	ease	him	through	this	crisis	(and	in	his	mind	it	really	is	 a
crisis)	is	to	soothe	him	and	help	him	shift	his	attention.	You	might
pick	 him	 up	 and	 show	 him	 something	 else	 of	 interest	 in	 another
room,	or	you	might	do	something	silly	or	o�-the-wall	to	change	the
dynamics	of	the	situation.	When	you	do	this,	you	are	helping	him
unlatch	the	gate,	so	that	the	stairway	of	integration	can	once	again
become	accessible	and	he	can	engage	his	upstairs	brain	and	begin
to	calm	down.
The	same	goes	for	when	the	problem	isn’t	anger	but	fear.	Think
of	an	active,	athletic	seven-year-old	who	refuses	to	learn	to	ride	a
bike.	 Her	 amygdala	 produces	 such	 paralyzing	 fear	 that	 she	 won’t
even	 attempt	 an	 activity	 at	 which	 she’s	 more	 than	 capable	 of
succeeding.	Her	amygdala	has	not	only	placed	a	baby	gate	at	the
bottom	of	the	stairs,	it	has	littered	the	stairway	with	the	equivalent
of	balls,	skates,	books,	and	shoes—all	kinds	of	obstacles	that	come
from	past	frightening	experiences	and	make	it	impossible	to	reach
the	higher	parts	of	her	brain.	In	this	situation,	there	would	again	be
many	 di�erent	 possible	 strategies	 for	 clearing	 the	 pathway.	 Her
parents	might	try	to	persuade	her	of	the	reward	of	taking	on	a	new
challenge;	 they	 might	 acknowledge	 and	 discuss	 their	 own	 fears;
they	 might	 even	 o�er	 an	 incentive	 to	 help	 her	 conquer	 her	 fear.
Any	 number	 of	 approaches	 might	 work	 to	 help	 her	 clear	 the
connection	to	her	upstairs	brain	and	quiet	her	amygdala,	which	is
shouting	the	message	that	she	might	fall	and	hurt	herself.
Think	 about	 what	 this	 information	 means,	 practically,	 as	 we
raise	 kids	 who	 don’t	 have	 constant	 access	 to	 their	 upstairs	 brain.
It’s	unrealistic	to	expect	them	always	to	be	rational,	regulate	their
emotions,	 make	 good	 decisions,	 think	 before	 acting,	 and	 be
empathetic—all	of	the	things	a	developed	upstairs	brain	helps	them
do.	 They	 can	 demonstrate	 some	 of	 these	 qualities	 to	 varying
degrees	much	of	the	time,	depending	on	their	age.	But	for	the	most
part,	 kids	 just	 don’t	 have	 the	 biological	 skill	 set	 to	 do	 so	all	 the
time.	Sometimes	they	can	use	their	upstairs	brain,	and	sometimes
they	 can’t.	 Just	 knowing	 this	 and	 adjusting	 our	 expectations	 can
help	us	see	that	our	kids	are	often	doing	the	best	they	can	with	the
brain	they	have.
So	does	that	give	them	a	get-out-of-jail-free	card	(“Sorry,	Mom,
that	 I	 squirted	 our	 new	 puppy’s	 face	 with	 Windex.	 I	 guess	 my
upstairs	 brain	 wasn’t	 fully	 engaged”)?	 Hardly.	 In	 fact,	 it	 actually
gives	us	parents	even	more	incentive	to	see	that	our	kids	develop
the	 faculties	 that	 result	 in	appropriate	 behavior.	 And	 it	 gives	 us	 a
pretty	 e�ective	 strategy	 for	 making	 some	 dicey	 decisions,
especially	when	we’re	in	the	middle	of	a	heated	situation—like	a
tantrum.
TANTRUMS:	UPSTAIRS	AND	DOWNSTAIRS
The	 dreaded	 tantrum	 can	 be	 one	 of	 the	 most	 unpleasant	 parts	 of
parenting.	Whether	it	takes	place	in	private	or	in	public,	it	can,	in
the	blink	of	an	eye,	turn	the	person	who	owns	our	heart	and	moves
mountains	 with	 one	 beautiful	 little	 smile,	 into	 the	 most
unattractive	and	repulsive	being	on	the	planet.
Most	parents	have	been	taught	that	there’s	only	one	good	way	to
respond	 to	 a	 tantrum:	 ignore	 it.	 Otherwise,	 you	 communicate	 to
your	 child	 that	 she	 has	 a	 powerful	 weapon	 to	 wield	 against	 you,
and	she	will	wield	it	over	and	over	again.
But	 what	 does	 this	 new	 knowledge	 about	 the	 brain	 say	 about
tantrums?	 When	 you	 know	 about	 the	 upstairs	 and	 downstairs
brain,	you	can	also	see	that	there	are	really	two	di�erent	types	of
tantrums.	
An	upstairs	 tantrum	 occurs	 when	 a	 child	 essentially
decides	to	throw	a	�t.	She	makes	a	conscious	choice	to	act	out,	to
push	 buttons	 and	 terrorize	 you	 until	 she	 get	 what	 she	 wants.
Despite	 her	 dramatic	 and	 seemingly	 heartfelt	 pleas,	 she	 could
instantly	 stop	 the	 tantrum	 if	 she	 wanted	 to—for	 instance,	 if	 you
gave	in	to	her	demands	or	reminded	her	that	she	is	about	to	lose	a
cherished	privilege.	The	reason	she	can	stop	is	that	she	is	using	her
upstairs	brain	at	that	moment.	She	is	able	to	control	her	emotions
and	body,	to	be	logical	and	make	good	decisions.	She	may	look	like
she’s	completely	out	of	control	as	she	screams	in	the	middle	of	the
mall,	“I	want	those	princess	slippers	now!”	But	you	can	see	that	she
knows	 what	 she’s	 doing,	 and	 that	 she’s	 de�nitely	 working	 from
strategy	and	manipulation	to	achieve	a	desired	end:	that	you	drop
everything	and	immediately	buy	the	slippers.
A	 parent	 who	 recognizes	 an	 upstairs	 tantrum	 is	 left	 with	 one
clear	 response:	 never	 negotiate	 with	 a	 terrorist.	 An	 upstairs
tantrum	 calls	 for	 �rm	 boundaries	 and	 a	 clear	 discussion	 about
appropriate	 and	 inappropriate	 behavior.	 A	 good	 response	 in	 this
situation	 would	 be	 to	 calmly	 explain,	 “I	 understand	 that	 you’re
excited	about	the	slippers,	but	I	don’t	like	the	way	you’re	acting.	If
you	 don’t	 stop	 now,	 you	 won’t	 get	 the	 slippers,	 and	 I’ll	 need	 to
cancel	 your	 playdate	 this	 afternoon,	 because	 you’re	 showing	 me
that	you’re	not	able	to	handle	yourself	well.”	Then	it’s	important	to
follow	through	on	those	consequences	if	the	behavior	doesn’t	stop.
By	 providing	 this	 type	 of	 �rm	 limit,	 you’re	 giving	 your	 daughter
practice	 at	 seeing	 the	 consequences	 of	 her	 inappropriate	 actions,
and	 at	 learning	 to	 control	 her	 impulses.	 You’re	 teaching	 her	 that
respectful	communication,	patience,	and	delayed	grati�cation	pay
o�—and	 that	 contrary	 behaviors	 don’t.	 Important	 lessons	 for	 a
developing	brain.
If	you	refuse	to	give	in	to	upstairs	tantrums—regardless	of	the
age	of	your	child—you’ll	stop	seeing	them	on	a	regular	basis.	Since
upstairs	 tantrums	 are	 intentional,	 children	 will	 stop	 returning	 to
that	 particular	 strategy	 when	 they	 learn	 that	 it’s	 ine�ective—and
often	even	leads	to	negative	results.
A	 downstairs	 tantrum	 is	 completely	 di�erent.	 Here,	 a	 child
becomes	so	upset	that	he’s	no	longer	able	to	use	his	upstairs	brain.
Your	toddler	becomes	so	angry	that	you	poured	water	on	his	head
to	wash	his	hair	that	he	begins	screaming,	throwing	toys	out	of	the
tub,	and	wildly	swinging	his	�sts,	trying	to	hit	you.	In	this	case,	the
lower	parts	of	his	brain—in	particular	his	amygdala—take	over	and
hijack	his	upstairs	brain.	He’s	not	even	close	to	being	in	a	state	of
integration.	 In	 fact,	 the	 stress	 hormones	 �ooding	 his	 little	 body
mean	that	virtually	no	part	of	his	higher	brain	is	fully	functioning.
As	 a	 result,	 he’s	 literally	 incapable—momentarily,	 at	 least—of
controlling	his	body	or	emotions,	and	of	using	all	of	those	higher-
order	 thinking	 skills,	 like	 considering	 consequences,	 solving
problems,	or	considering	others’	feelings.	He’s	�ipped	his	lid.	The
baby	gate	is	blocking	access	to	the	upstairs,	and	he	simply	can’t	use
his	 whole	 brain.	 (When	 you	 later	 tell	 someone	 that	 your	 child
“totally	 lost	 his	 mind,”	 you’ll	 actually	 be	 more	 neurologically
accurate	than	you	realize!)
When	 your	 child	 is	 in	 this	 state	 of	 dis-integration	 and	 a	 full-
blown	 downstairs	 tantrum	 has	 erupted,	 a	 completely	 di�erent
parental	 response	 is	 called	 for.	 Whereas	 a	 child	 throwing	 an
upstairs	tantrum	needs	a	parent	to	quickly	set	�rm	boundaries,	an
appropriate	 response	 to	 a	 downstairs	 tantrum	 is	 much	 more
nurturing	and	 comforting.	 As	 in	 the	 “connect	 and	 redirect”
technique	we	discussed	in	chapter	2,	the	�rst	thing	a	parent	needs
to	do	is	to	connect	with	the	child	and	help	him	calm	himself	down.
This	 can	 often	 be	 accomplished	 through	 loving	 touch	 and	 a
soothing	tone	of	voice.	Or,	if	he	has	gone	so	far	that	he’s	in	danger
of	 hurting	 himself	 or	 someone	 else	 or	 destroying	 property,	 you
may	 have	 to	 hold	 him	 close	 and	 calmly	 talk	 him	 down	 as	 you
remove	him	from	the	scene.
You	 can	 experiment	 with	 di�erent	 approaches	 depending	 on
your	 child’s	 temperament,	 but	 what’s	 most	 important	 is	 that	 you
help	 soothe	 him	 and	 steer	 him	 away	 from	 the	 chaos	 bank	 of	 the
river.	 There’s	 no	 sense	 in	 talking	 about	 consequences	 or
appropriate	 behavior.	 He	 simply	 can’t	 process	 any	 of	 that
information	 when	 he’s	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 his	 downstairs	 tantrum,
because	that	conversation	requires	a	functioning	upstairs	brain	that
can	listen	and	assimilate	information.	So	your	�rst	task,	when	your
child’s	upstairs	brain	has	been	hijacked	by	his	downstairs	brain,	is
to	help	calm	his	amygdala.
Then,	once	the	upstairs	brain	reenters	the	picture,	you	can	begin
to	respond	to	the	issue	using	logic	and	reason.	(“Did	you	not	like	it
that	 Daddy	 washed	 your	 hair	 like	 that?	 Do	 you	 have	 any	 ideas
about	how	we	should	wash	your	hair	next	time?”)	Once	he	is	in	a
more	 receptive	 place,	 you	 can	 also	 talk	 about	 appropriate	 and
inappropriate	 behavior,	 and	 about	 any	 possible	 consequences	 (“I
know	 you	 were	 really	 angry	 about	 the	 water	 splashing	 in	 your
face.	But	it’s	not	OK	to	hit	when	you’re	mad.	You	can	use	words
and	 tell	 Daddy,	 ‘I	 don’t	 like	 that.	 Please	 stop’	 ”).	 Your	 discipline
can	 now	 maintain	 your	 authority—that’s	 crucial—but	 you	 can	 do
so	 from	 a	 more	 informed	 and	 compassionate	 position.	 And	 your
child	 is	 more	 likely	 to	 internalize	 the	 lesson	 because	 you’re
teaching	it	when	his	brain	is	more	receptive	to	learning.
As	 any	 veteran	 parent	 knows,	 �ipping	 the	 lid	 isn’t	 unique	 to
toddlers.	It	may	look	di�erent	when	it	occurs	in	a	ten-year-old,	but
a	 child	 of	 any	 age	 (or	 even	 an	 adult!)	 is	 prone	 to	 having	 the
downstairs	brain	take	over	in	high-emotion	situations.	That’s	why
an	awareness	of	the	upstairs	brain	and	the	downstairs	brain—and
the	tantrums	that	originate	from	each	place—can	help	us	be	much
more	e�ective	as	we	discipline	our	children.	We	can	more	clearly
see	when	it’s	time	to	draw	the	line	and	when	it’s	time	to	bring	lots
of	nurturing	compassion	to	help	engage	the	upstairs	brain.
Tantrums	 provide	 just	 one	 example	 of	 how	 practical	 this
upstairs-downstairs	knowledge	can	be.	Now	let’s	talk	about	other
ways	you	can	help	develop	your	child’s	upstairs	brain	and	allow	it
to	become	stronger	and	more	integrated	with	the	downstairs	brain.
What	You	Can	Do:
Helping	Develop	and	Integrate	Your	Child’s	Upstairs	Brain
Whole-Brain	Strategy	#3:
Engage,	Don’t	Enrage:	Appealing	to	the	Upstairs	Brain
Ask	yourself,	as	you	interact	with	your	kids	through	the	day,	which
part	 of	 their	 brain	 you’re	 appealing	 to.	 Are	 you	 engaging	 the
upstairs?	Or	are	you	triggering	the	downstairs?	The	answer	to	this
question	can	go	a	long	way	toward	determining	the	outcome	of	one
of	 those	 delicately	 balanced	 parenting	 moments.	 Here’s	 a	 story
Tina	tells	about	a	time	she	faced	just	such	a	moment	with	her	son:
While	 eating	 at	 one	 of	 our	 favorite	 Mexican	 restaurants,	 I
noticed	 that	 my	 four-year-old	 had	 left	 the	 table	 and	 was
standing	 behind	 a	 pillar	 about	 ten	 feet	 away.	 As	 much	 as	 I
love	him,	and	as	adorable	as	he	is	most	of	the	time,	when	I
saw	his	angry,	de�ant	face	coupled	with	his	repeated	tongue-
thrusting	aimed	at	our	table,	“adorable”	wasn’t	the	word	that
came	to	my	mind.	A	few	diners	at	surrounding	tables	noticed
and	looked	at	my	husband,	Scott,	and	me	to	see	how	we	were
going	to	handle	the	situation.	In	that	moment,	Scott	and	I	felt
the	pressure	and	judgment	of	those	watching	and	expecting	us
to	lay	down	the	law	about	manners	at	a	restaurant.
I	 clearly	 saw	 two	 choices	 as	 I	 walked	 over	 and	 crouched
down	 eye-level	 with	 my	 son.	 Option	 #1:	 I	 could	 go	 the
traditional	 “command	 and	 demand”	 route	 and	 open	 with	 a
clichéd	 threat	 uttered	 in	 a	 stern	 tone:	 “Stop	 making	 faces,
young	man.	Go	sit	down	and	eat	your	lunch	or	you	won’t	get
any	dessert.”
At	 times	 option	 #1	 might	 be	 an	 appropriate	 parental
response.	 But	 for	 my	 little	 guy,	 this	 verbal	 and	 nonverbal
confrontation	would	 have	 triggered	 all	 kinds	 of	 reactive
emotions	in	his	downstairs	brain—the	part	scientists	call	the
reptilian	brain—and	he	would	have	fought	back	like	a	reptile
under	attack.
Or	option	#2:	I	could	tap	into	his	upstairs	brain	in	an	e�ort
to	get	more	of	a	thinking—as	opposed	to	a	fighting/reacting—
response.
Now,	 I	 make	 plenty	 of	 mistakes	 as	 I	 parent	 my	 boys	 (as
they’ll	freely	tell	you).	But	just	the	day	before,	I	had	given	a
lecture	 to	 a	 group	 of	 parents	 about	 the	 upstairs	 and
downstairs	 brain,	 and	 about	 using	 everyday	 challenges—the
survival	 moments—as	 opportunities	 to	 help	 our	 kids	 thrive.
So,	 luckily	 for	 my	 son,	 all	 of	 that	 was	 fresh	 in	 my	 mind.	 I
decided	to	choose	option	#2.
I	 started	 with	 an	 observation:	 “You	 look	 like	 you	 feel
angry.	Is	that	right?”	(Remember	“connect	and	redirect”?)	He
scrunched	up	his	face	in	ferocity,	stuck	out	his	tongue	again,
and	loudly	proclaimed,	“Yes!”	I	was	actually	relieved	that	he
stopped	there;	it	wouldn’t	have	been	at	all	unlike	him	to	add
his	 latest	 favorite	 insult	 and	 call	 me	 “Fart-face	 Jones.”	 (I
swear	I	don’t	know	where	they	learn	this	stuff.)
I	asked	him	what	he	felt	angry	about	and	discovered	that
he	 was	 furious	 that	 Scott	 had	 told	 him	 he	 needed	 to	 eat	 at
least	 half	 of	 his	 quesadilla	 before	 he	 could	 have	 dessert.	 I
explained	that	I	could	see	why	that	would	be	disappointing,
and	I	said,	“Well,	Daddy’s	really	good	at	negotiating.	Decide
what	you	think	would	be	a	fair	amount	to	eat,	and	then	go
talk	to	him	about	it.	Let	me	know	if	you	need	help	coming	up
with	your	plan.”	I	tousled	his	hair,	returned	to	the	table,	and
watched	his	once-again	adorable	face	show	evidence	of	doing
some	hard	thinking.	His	upstairs	brain	was	definitely	engaged.
In	fact,	it	was	at	war	with	his	downstairs	brain.	So	far	we	had
avoided	a	blow-up,	but	it	still	felt	like	a	dangerous	fuse	might
be	burning	within	him.
Within	�fteen	seconds	or	so,	my	son	returned	and	said	to
Scott	in	an	angry	tone	of	voice,	“Dad,	I	don’t	want	to	eat	half
of	 my	 quesadilla.	And	 I	 want	 dessert.”	 Scott’s	 response
perfectly	dovetailed	with	my	own:	“Well,	what	do	you	think
would	be	a	fair	amount?”
The	 answer	 came	 with	 slow,	 �rm	 resolve:	 “I’ve	 got	 one
word	for	you:	Ten	bites.”
What	makes	this	unmathematical	response	even	funnier	is
that	 ten	 bites	 meant	 that	 he	 would	 eat	 well	 over	 half	 the
quesadilla.	So	Scott	accepted	the	countero�er,	my	son	happily
gobbled	down	ten	bites	and	then	his	dessert,	and	the	whole
family	(as	well	as	the	restaurant’s	other	patrons)	got	to	enjoy
lunch	 with	 no	 further	 incidents.	 My	 son’s	 downstairs	 brain
never	 fully	 took	 over,	 which,	 luckily	 for	 us,	 meant	 that	 his
upstairs	brain	had	won	the	day.
Again,	 option	 #1	 would	 have	 been	 perfectly	 �ne,	 even
appropriate.	 But	 it	 also	 would	 have	 missed	 an	 opportunity.
My	son	would	have	missed	a	chance	to	see	that	relationships
are	 about	 connection,	 communication,	 and	 compromise.	 He
would	have	missed	a	chance	to	feel	empowered	that	he	can
make	choices,	a�ect	his	environment,	and	solve	problems.	In
short,	he	would	have	missed	an	opportunity	to	exercise	and
develop	his	upstairs	brain.
And	I	hasten	to	point	out	that	even	though	I	chose	option
#2,	 Scott	 and	 I	 still	 had	 to	 address	 the	 misbehavior	 part	 of
the	incident.	Once	our	son	was	more	in	control	of	himself	and
could	 actually	 be	 receptive	 to	 what	 we	 had	 to	 say,	 we
discussed	the	importance	of	being	respectful	and	using	good
manners	in	a	restaurant,	even	when	he’s	unhappy.
This	 is	 an	 example	 of	 how	 simple	 awareness	 of	 the	 downstairs
and	upstairs	brain	can	have	a	direct	and	immediate	impact	on	the
way	 we	 parent	 and	 discipline	 our	 children.	 Notice	 that	 when	 the
challenge	arose,	Tina	asked	herself,	“Which	part	of	the	brain	do	I
want	to	appeal	to	here?”	She	could	have	gotten	what	she	wanted
by	challenging	her	son	and	demanding	that	he	change	his	behavior
immediately.	She	has	enough	authority	in	his	eyes	that	he	would
have	 obeyed	 (albeit	 resentfully).	 But	 that	 approach	 would	 have
triggered	 the	 downstairs	 brain,	 and	 his	 anger	 and	 feelings	 of
unfairness	would	have	raged	within	him.	So	instead,	Tina	engaged
his	 upstairs	 brain	 by	 helping	 him	 think	 through	 the	 situation	 and
find	a	way	to	negotiate	with	his	father.
Let’s	 make	 one	 thing	 clear:	 sometimes	 there	 is	 no	 place	 for
negotiation	 in	 parent-child	 interactions.	 Children	 need	 to	 respect
their	parents’	authority,	and	sometimes	that	means	that	no	simply
means	no,	without	wiggle	room.	Also,	sometimes	countero�ers	are
unacceptable.	 If	 Tina’s	 four-year-old	 had	 suggested	 that	 he	 take
only	 one	 bite	 of	 his	 lunch,	 his	 dad	 wouldn’t	 have	 been	 open	 to
striking	that	particular	deal.
But	as	we	parent	and	discipline	our	kids,	we	are	given	so	 many
opportunities	 to	 interact	 in	 ways	 that	 engage	 and	 develop	 their
upstairs	brain.
Notice	how,	in	the	illustration	on	this	page,	the	mother	chose	not
to	 present	 an	 ultimatum	 that	 would	 enrage	 the	 downstairs	 brain.
Instead,	 she	 engaged	 the	 upstairs	 brain	 by	 �rst	 directing	 her
daughter	to	use	more	precise	and	speci�c	words	for	how	she	was
feeling	(“Are	you	feeling	really	mad	because	I	didn’t	get	you	that
necklace?”).	Then	she	asked	her	daughter	to	work	with	her	to	be	a
problem	 solver.	 Once	 the	 girl	 asks,	 “How	 do	 we	 do	 that?”	 the
mother	knows	that	the	upstairs	brain	is	engaged.	Her	daughter	is
now	able	to	discuss	the	issue	with	her	mom	in	a	way	she	couldn’t
just	 a	 few	 seconds	 ago.	 Now	 they	 can	 brainstorm	 together	 about
getting	another	necklace	at	the	store	or	making	one	at	home.	The
mother	 can	 also	 now	 talk	 to	 her	 daughter	 about	 how	 to	 use	 her
words	when	she’s	angry.
Every	time	we	say	“Convince	me”	or	“Come	up	with	a	solution
that	works	for	both	of	us,”	we	give	our	kids	the	chance	to	practice
problem	 solving	 and	 decision	 making.	 We	 help	 them	 consider
appropriate	behaviors	and	consequences,	and	we	help	them	think
about	what	another	person	feels	and	wants.	All	because	we	found	a
way	to	engage	the	upstairs,	instead	of	enraging	the	downstairs.
Whole-Brain	Strategy	#4:
Use	It	or	Lose	It:	Exercising	the	Upstairs	Brain
In	 addition	 to	 appealing	 to	 our	 children’s	 upstairs	 brain,	 we	 also
want	to	help	them	exercise	it.	The	upstairs	brain	is	like	a	muscle:
when	it	gets	used,	it	develops,	gets	stronger,	and	performs	better.
And	when	it	gets	ignored,	it	doesn’t	develop	optimally,	losing	some
of	its	power	and	ability	to	function.	That’s	what	we	mean	by	“use
it	 or	 lose	 it.”	 We	 want	 to	 be	 intentional	 about	 developing	 the
upstairs	 brain	 of	 our	 children.	 As	 we’ve	 been	 saying,	 a	 strong
upstairs	brain	 balances	 out	 the	 downstairs	 brain,	 and	 is	 essential
for	 social	 and	 emotional	 intelligence.	 It’s	 the	 foundation	 of	 solid
mental	 health.	 Our	 job	 is	 to	 provide	 our	 kids	 with	 opportunity
after	opportunity	to	exercise	their	upstairs	brain	so	that	it	can	grow
stronger	and	more	powerful.
As	you	and	your	children	go	through	your	day,	watch	for	ways
you	 can	 focus	 on	 and	 exercise	 di�erent	 functions	 of	 the	 upstairs
brain.	Let’s	look	at	a	few	of	them,	one	by	one.
Sound	Decision	Making
One	big	parental	temptation	is	to	make	decisions	for	our	kids,	so
that	they	consistently	do	the	right	thing.	But	as	often	as	possible,
we	need	to	give	them	practice	at	making	decisions	for	themselves.
Decision	 making	 requires	 what’s	 called	 executive	 functioning,
which	 occurs	 when	 the	 upstairs	 brain	 weighs	 di�erent	 options.
Considering	 several	 competing	 alternatives,	 as	 well	 as	 the
outcomes	 of	 those	 choices,	 gives	 a	 child’s	 upstairs	 brain	 practice,
strengthening	it	and	allowing	it	to	work	better.
For	very	young	children,	this	can	be	as	simple	as	asking,	“Do	you
want	to	wear	your	blue	shoes	or	your	white	shoes	today?”	Then,	as
kids	get	older,	we	can	give	them	more	responsibility	in	the	decision
making	and	allow	them	to	take	on	some	dilemmas	that	can	really
challenge	 them.	 For	 instance,	 if	 your	 ten-year-old	 daughter	 has	 a
scheduling	 con�ict—both	 her	 Girl	 Scout	 campout	 and	 her	 soccer
playo�	are	on	Saturday	and	she	clearly	can’t	be	in	both	places	at
the	 same	 time—encourage	 her	 to	 make	 the	 choice.	 She’s	 much
more	 likely	 to	 be	 comfortable,	 if	 not	 completely	 happy,	 about
having	 to	 give	 up	 one	 commitment	 if	 she’s	 been	 a	 part	 of	 the
process	of	making	the	decision.
An	allowance	is	another	terri�c	way	to	give	older	kids	practice
at	 dealing	 with	 di�cult	 dilemmas.	 The	 experience	 of	 deciding
between	 buying	 a	 computer	 game	 now	 or	 continuing	 to	 save	 for
that	new	bike	is	a	powerful	way	to	exercise	the	upstairs	brain.	The
point	is	to	let	your	children	wrestle	with	the	decision	and	live	with
the	 consequences.	 Whenever	 you	 can	 do	 so	 responsibly,	 avoid
solving	and	resist	rescuing,	even	when	they	make	minor	mistakes
or	not-so-great	choices.	After	all,	your	goal	here	isn’t	perfection	on
every	 decision	 right	 now,	 but	 an	 optimally	 developed	 upstairs
brain	down	the	road.
Controlling	Emotions	and	the	Body
Another	important—and	di�cult—task	for	little	ones	is	to	remain
in	control	of	themselves.	So	we	need	to	give	them	skills	that	help
them	make	good	decisions	when	they	are	upset.	Use	the	techniques
you’re	probably	already	familiar	with:	Teach	them	to	take	a	deep
breath,	or	count	to	ten.	Help	them	express	their	feelings.	Let	them
stomp	their	feet	or	punch	a	pillow.	You	can	also	teach	them	what’s
happening	in	their	brains	when	they	feel	themselves	losing	control
—and	how	to	avoid	“�ipping	their	lid.”	(We’ll	help	you	with	this	in
the	“Whole-Brain	Kids”	section	at	the	end	of	the	chapter.)
Even	small	children	have	the	capacity	to	stop	and	think	instead
of	 hurting	 someone	 with	 their	 words	 or	 their	 �sts.	 They	 won’t
always	 make	 good	 decisions,	 but	 the	 more	 fully	 they	 practice
alternatives	other	than	lashing	out,	the	stronger	and	more	capable
their	upstairs	brain	will	become.
Self-understanding
One	of	the	best	ways	to	foster	self-understanding	in	your	children
is	to	ask	questions	that	help	them	look	beyond	the	surface	of	what
they	 understand:	Why	 do	 you	 think	 you	 made	 that	 choice?	 What
made	you	feel	that	way?	Why	do	you	think	you	didn’t	do	well	on	your
test—was	 it	 because	 you	 were	 hurrying,	 or	 is	 this	 just	 really	 di�cult
material?
This	is	what	one	father	did	for	his	ten-year-old,	Catherine,	as	he
helped	her	pack	for	camp.	He	asked	whether	she	expected	to	feel
homesick	 while	 she	 was	 away.	 When	 he	 received	 the	 expected
noncommittal	 “Maybe”	 in	 response,	 he	 followed	 up	 with	 another
question:	“How	do	you	think	you’ll	handle	that?”
Again	he	received	a	non-answer—“I	don’t	know”—but	this	time
he	could	see	her	beginning	to	think	about	the	question,	if	only	a
little.
So	he	pressed	further:	“If	you	do	start	feeling	homesick,	what’s
something	you	can	do	to	feel	better?”
Catherine	continued	stu�ng	clothes	into	her	du�el	bag,	but	she
was	obviously	thinking	about	the	question	now.	Finally	she	o�ered
an	actual	answer:	“I	guess	I	could	write	you	a	letter,	or	I	could	do
something	fun	with	my	friends.”
From	here	she	and	her	father	were	able	to	talk	for	a	couple	of
minutes	 about	 her	 expectations	 and	 concerns	 about	 going	 away,
and	 she	 developed	 a	 bit	 more	 self-understanding.	 Simply	 because
her	father	asked	her	a	few	questions.
When	your	child	is	old	enough	to	be	able	to	write—or	even	just
draw—you	might	give	him	a	journal	and	encourage	daily	writing	or
drawing.	This	ritual	can	enhance	his	ability	to	pay	attention	to	and
understand	his	internal	landscape.	Or	for	a	younger	child,	have	her
draw	 pictures	 that	 tell	 a	 story.	 The	 more	 your	 kids	 think	 about
what’s	going	on	within	themselves,	the	more	they	will	develop	the
ability	to	understand	and	respond	to	what’s	going	on	in	the	worlds
within	and	around	them.
Empathy
Empathy	is	another	important	function	of	the	upstairs	brain.	When
you	 ask	 simple	 questions	 that	 encourage	 the	 consideration	 of
another’s	 feelings,	 you	 are	 building	 your	 child’s	 ability	 to	 feel
empathy.	At	a	restaurant:	“Why	do	you	think	that	baby	is	crying?”
While	 you’re	 reading	 together:	 “How	 do	 you	 think	 Melinda	 is
feeling	now	that	her	friend	moved	away?”	Leaving	the	store:	“That
woman	wasn’t	very	nice	to	us,	was	she?	Do	you	think	something
might	have	happened	to	her	that	made	her	feel	sad	today?”
Simply	 by	 drawing	 your	 child’s	 attention	 to	 other	 people’s
emotions	during	everyday	encounters,	you	can	open	up	whole	new
levels	of	compassion	within	them	and	exercise	their	upstairs	brain.
Scientists	are	beginning	more	and	more	to	think	that	empathy	has
its	 roots	 in	 a	 complex	 system	 of	 what	 are	 being	 called	 mirror
neurons,	 which	 we’ll	 discuss	 in	 the	 next	 chapter.	 The	 more	 you
give	your	child’s	upstairs	brain	practice	at	thinking	of	others,	the
more	capable	he	will	be	of	having	compassion.
Morality
All	 of	 the	 above	 attributes	 of	 a	 well-integrated	 upstairs	 brain
culminate	 in	 one	 of	 our	 most	 important	 goals	 for	 our	 children:	 a
strong	 sense	 of	 morality.	 When	 kids	 can	 make	 sound	 decisions
while	controlling	themselves	and	working	from	empathy	and	self-
understanding,	 they	 will	 develop	 a	 robust	 and	 active	 sense	 of
morality,	a	sense	of	not	only	right	and	wrong,	but	also	what	is	for
the	 greater	 good	 beyond	 their	 own	 individual	 needs.	 Again,	 we
can’t	 expect	 absolute	 consistency	 because	 of	 their	 still-developing
brain.	 But	 we	 do	 want	 to	 raise	 questions	 regarding	 morals	 and
ethics	as	often	as	possible	in	normal,	everyday	situations.
Another	 way	 to	 exercise	 this	 part	 of	 the	 brain	 is	 to	 o�er
hypothetical	 situations,	 which	 kids	 often	 love:	Would	 it	 be	 OK	 to
run	a	red	 light	 if	 there	 was	 an	 emergency?	 If	 a	 bully	 was	 picking	 on
someone	at	school	and	there	were	no	adults	around,	what	would	you
do?	The	point	is	to	challenge	your	children	to	think	about	how	they
act,	and	to	consider	the	implications	of	their	decisions.	In	doing	so,
you	 give	 your	 kids	 practice	 thinking	 through	 moral	 and	 ethical
principles,	which,	with	your	guidance,	will	become	the	foundation
for	the	way	they	make	decisions	for	the	rest	of	their	lives.
And,	of	course,	consider	what	you	are	modeling	with	your	own
behavior.	As	you	teach	them	about	honesty,	generosity,	kindness,
and	respect,	make	sure	that	they	see	you	living	a	life	that	embodies
those	values	as	well.	The	examples	you	set,	for	good	and	for	bad,
will	 signi�cantly	 impact	 the	 way	 your	 child’s	 upstairs	 brain
develops.
Whole-Brain	Strategy	#5:
Move	It	or	Lose	It:	Moving	the	Body	to	Avoid	Losing	the	Mind
Research	 has	 shown	 that	 bodily	 movement	 directly	 a�ects	 brain
chemistry.	 So	 when	 one	 of	 your	 children	 has	 lost	 touch	 with	 his
upstairs	 brain,	 a	 powerful	 way	 to	 help	 him	 regain	 balance	 is	 to
have	him	move	his	body.	Here’s	a	story	a	mother	told	us	about	her
ten-year-old	son	and	a	time	he	regained	control	by	being	physically
active.
Two	 days	 after	 Liam	 started	 �fth	 grade,	 he	 felt	 completely
overwhelmed	 by	 the	 amount	 of	 homework	 his	 teacher	 had
assigned.	(I	agreed	with	him,	by	the	way.	It	was	a	lot.)	He
was	complaining	about	it,	but	he	eventually	went	to	his	room
to	work	on	it.
When	I	went	to	check	on	his	progress,	I	found	him	literally
curled	up	in	a	fetal	position	under	his	bean	bag	chair	in	his
room.	I	encouraged	him	to	come	out,	to	sit	at	his	desk	and
keep	 working	 on	 his	 studies.	 He	 kept	 whining,	 saying	 he
couldn’t	 do	 it:	 “It’s	 just	 too	 much!”	 I	 kept	 o�ering	 to	 help
him,	and	he	kept	refusing	my	help.
Then	all	of	a	sudden,	he	jumped	out	from	under	the	bean
bag	 chair,	 ran	 downstairs,	 ran	 out	 the	 front	 door,	 and	 kept
running.	 He	 ran	 several	 blocks	 through	 the	 neighborhood
before	coming	home.
When	 we	 had	 him	 safely	 back	 in	 the	 house,	 and	 he	 had
calmed	 down	 and	 had	 a	 snack,	 I	 was	 able	 to	 talk	 with	 him
and	 ask	 why	 he	 had	 taken	 o�	 like	 that.	 He	 said	 he	 didn’t
really	know.	He	said,	“The	only	thing	I	can	think	of	is	that	I
felt	like	it	would	make	me	feel	better	if	I	ran	as	fast	as	I	could
for	as	long	as	I	could.	And	it	did.”	And	I	have	to	admit—he
did	 seem	 a	 lot	 more	 calm,	 and	 ready	 to	 have	 me	 help	 him
with	his	homework.
Even	 though	 Liam	 didn’t	 know	 it,	 when	 he	 left	 the	 house	 and
ran,	he	was	practicing	integration.	His	downstairs	brain	had	bullied
his	
upstairs	
brain	
into	
submission,	
leaving	
him	
feeling
overwhelmed	and	helpless.	He	had	�oated	way	over	near	the	chaos
bank	 of	 the	 river.	 His	 mother’s	 attempts	 to	 help	 bring	 in	 his
upstairs	brain	were	unsuccessful,	but	when	Liam	brought	his	body
into	the	conversation,	something	changed	in	his	brain.	After	a	few
minutes	 of	 exercise,	 he	 was	 able	 to	 calm	 his	 amygdala	 and	 give
control	back	to	his	upstairs	brain.
Studies	 support	 Liam	 and	 his	 spontaneous	 strategy.	 Research
shows	that	when	we	change	our	physical	state—through	movement
or	 relaxation,	 for	 example—we	 can	 change	 our	 emotional	 state.
Try	 smiling	 for	 a	 minute—it	 can	 make	 you	 feel	 happier;	 quick,
shallow	breaths	accompany	anxiety,	and	if	you	take	a	slow,	deep
breath,	you’ll	likely	feel	calmer.	(You	can	try	these	little	exercises
with	your	child	to	teach	her	how	her	body	affects	how	she	feels.)
The	body	is	full	of	information	that	it	sends	to	the	brain.	In	fact,
a	 lot	 of	 the	 emotion	 we	 feel	 actually	 begins	 in	 the	 body.	 Our
churning	 stomach	 and	 tense	 shoulders	 send	 physical	 messages	 of
anxiety	to	the	brain	before	we	even	consciously	realize	that	we’re
nervous.	The	flow	of	energy	and	information	from	the	body	up	into
our	brain	stem,	into	our	limbic	region,	and	then	up	into	the	cortex,
changes	our	bodily	states,	our	emotional	states,	and	our	thoughts.
What	 happened	 for	 Liam,	 then,	 was	 that	 the	 movement	 of	 his
body	helped	bring	his	whole	self	into	a	state	of	integration,	so	his
upstairs	 brain,	 his	 downstairs	 brain,	 and	 his	 body	 could	 all	 once
again	do	their	jobs	in	a	way	that	was	e�ective	and	healthy.	When
he	felt	overwhelmed,	the	�ow	of	energy	and	information	became
blocked,	 resulting	 in	 dis-integration.	 Vigorously	 moving	 his	 body
released	 some	 of	 his	 angry	 energy	 and	 tension,	 allowing	 him	 to
relax.	So	after	his	run,	his	body	sent	“calmer”	information	to	his
upstairs	brain,	meaning	that	his	emotional	balance	returned	and	the
di�erent	parts	of	his	brain	and	body	began	to	function	again	in	an
integrated	way.
The	 next	 time	 your	 children	 need	 help	 calming	 down	 or
regaining	 control,	 look	 for	 ways	 to	 get	 them	 moving.	 For	 young
kids,	 experiment	 with	 what	 might	 be	 called	 creative,	 loving
trickery,	as	shown	on	this	page.
The	 fun	 of	 this	 game,	 coupled	 with	 the	 physical	 activity,	 can
completely	 change	 your	 toddler’s	 mind-set	 and	 make	 the	 whole
morning	much	more	enjoyable	for	both	of	you.
This	technique	works	for	older	kids,	also.	A	Little	League	coach
we	know	heard	about	the	“move	it	or	lose	it”	principle	and	ended
up	having	his	players	jump	up	and	down	in	the	dugout	when	they
got	 discouraged	 after	 giving	 up	 a	 few	 early	 runs	 during	 the
championship.	The	boys’	movement	brought	a	shift	of	excitement
and	new	energy	into	their	bodies	and	brains,	and	they	eventually
came	 back	 and	 won	 the	 game.	 (Chalk	 up	 another	 victory	 for
neuroscience!)
At	times,	too,	you	can	simply	explain	the	concept:	I	know	you’re
mad	you	didn’t	get	to	go	on	the	sleepover	with	your	sister.	Doesn’t	seem
fair,	does	it?	Let’s	go	ride	our	bikes	and	talk	about	it.	Sometimes	just
moving	your	body	can	help	your	brain	feel	like	things	are	going	to	be
OK.	However	you	do	it,	the	point	is	to	help	your	child	regain	some
sort	 of	 balance	 and	 control	 by	 moving	 their	 body,	 which	 can
remove	blockages	and	pave	the	way	for	integration	to	return.
Whole-Brain	Kids:
Teach	Your	Kids	About	Their	Downstairs	and	Upstairs	Brain
Kids	
can	
pretty	
easily	
understand	
the	
upstairs-downstairs
information	we’ve	presented	in	this	chapter.	Here’s	something	you
can	read	to	your	child	to	help	get	the	conversation	going.
Integrating	Ourselves:	Using	Our	Own	Mental	Staircase
“My	 young	 son	 was	 screaming	 for	 forty-�ve	 minutes	 and	 I
didn’t	 know	 how	 to	 comfort	 him.	 I	 �nally	 screamed	 back,
‘Sometimes	I	hate	you!’	”
“My	 son	 was	 two	 and	 scratched	 his	 baby	 brother’s	 face	 so
hard	that	he	left	marks.	I	spanked	his	bottom,	like	�ve	hard
swats.	 Then	 I	 left	 the	 room,	 walked	 down	 the	 hall,	 turned
back	 around,	 and	 spanked	 him	 probably	 �ve	 more	 swats
again.	I	screamed	at	him	so	loud,	I	terrified	him.”
“After	 I	 had	 told	 my	 daughter	 to	 watch	 out	 for	 her	 little
brother	running	in	front	of	the	swing,	she	almost	swung	right
into	him.	I	was	so	mad	that	even	in	front	of	other	people	at
the	 park	 I	 said	 to	 her,	 ‘What’s	 wrong	 with	 you—are	 you
stupid?’	”
These	 are	 some	 pretty	 awful	 parenting	 experiences,	 aren’t
they?	 They	 represent	 our	 downstairs	 moments,	 the	 times
when	 we’re	 so	 out	 of	 control	 that	 we	 say	 or	 do	 something
we’d	never	let	anyone	else	say	or	do	to	our	child.
The	 confessions	 above	 come	 from	 real	 parents	 whom	 we
know	 personally.	 And	 although	 it	 may	 surprise	 you,	 each	 of
those	parents	does	a	great	job	at	raising	their	kids.	But	like	the
rest	of	us,	they	just	lose	it	from	time	to	time	and	say	and	do
things	they	wish	they	hadn’t.
Could	 you	 add	 your	 own	 downstairs	 moment	 to	 the	 list
above?	 Of	 course	 you	 could.	 You’re	 a	 parent,	 and	 you’re
human.	 We	 see	 it	 time	 and	 again	 when	 we	 speak	 to	 and
counsel	 parents:	 in	 high-stress	 parenting	 situations,	 parents
make	mistakes.	All	of	us	do.
But	 don’t	 forget:	 parenting	 crises	 are	 openings	 for	 growth
and	 integration.	 You	 can	 use	 the	 moments	 when	 you	 feel
yourself	 losing	 control	 as	 opportunities	 to	 model	 self-
regulation.	 Little	 eyes	 are	 watching	 to	 see	 how	you	 calm
yourself	down.	Your	actions	set	an	example	of	how	to	make	a
good	choice	in	a	high-emotion	moment	when	you’re	in	danger
of	flipping	your	lid.
So	what	do	you	do	when	you	recognize	that	your	downstairs
brain	 has	 taken	 over	 and	 you’ve	 begun	 to	 lose	 your	 mind?
First,	 do	 no	 harm.	 Close	 your	 mouth	 to	 avoid	 saying
something	you’ll	regret.	Put	your	hands	behind	your	back	to
avoid	 any	 kind	 of	 rough	 physical	 contact.	 When	 you’re	 in	 a
downstairs	moment,	protect	your	child	at	all	costs.
Second,	 remove	 yourself	 from	 the	 situation	 and	 collect
yourself.	 There’s	 nothing	 wrong	 with	 taking	 a	 breather,
especially	 when	 it	 means	 protecting	 your	 child.	 You	 can	 tell
her	 you	 need	 a	 break	 to	 calm	 down	 so	 she	 doesn’t	 feel
rejected.	Then,	although	it	might	feel	a	bit	silly	at	times,	try
out	the	“move	it	or	lose	it”	technique.	Do	jumping	jacks.	Try
some	yoga	stretches.	Take	slow,	deep	breaths.	Do	whatever	it
takes	 to	 regain	 some	 of	 the	 control	 you	 lost	 when	 your
amygdala	hijacked	your	upstairs	brain.	You’ll	not	only	move
into	a	more	integrated	state	yourself,	but	also	model	for	your
kids	some	quick	self-regulation	tricks	they	can	use.
Finally,	repair.	Quickly.	Reconnect	with	your	child	as	soon
as	you	are	calm	and	feeling	more	in	control	of	yourself.	Then
deal	 with	 whatever	 emotional	 and	 relational	 harm	 has	 been
done.	 This	 may	 involve	 your	 expressing	 forgiveness,	 but	 it
may	also	require	that	you	apologize	and	accept	responsibility
for	your	own	actions.	This	step	needs	to	occur	as	quickly	as
possible.	 The	 sooner	 you	 repair	 the	 connection	 between
yourself	and	your	child,	the	sooner	you	can	both	regain	your
emotional	balance	and	get	back	to	enjoying	your	relationship
together.
CHAPTER	4
Kill	the	Butterflies!
Integrating	Memory	for	Growth	and	Healing
“There	is	no	way	I’m	taking	swimming	lessons	this	summer!”
Tina’s	 seven-year-old	 made	 this	 �rm	 proclamation	 when	 he
found	out	his	parents	had	signed	him	up	for	lessons	at	their	local
high	school	pool.	Sitting	at	the	dinner	table,	he	glared	at	his	mom
and	dad,	setting	his	jaw	and	narrowing	his	eyes.
Tina	 looked	 to	 her	 husband,	 Scott,	 who	 shrugged,	 as	 if	 to	 say,
OK,	I’ll	go	first.
“I	don’t	get	it.	You	love	swimming.”
“Exactly,	 Dad,	 that’s	 the	point.”	 He	 even	 sounded	 sarcastic.	 “I
already	know	how	to	swim.”
Scott	nodded.	“We	know	you	do.	The	lessons	are	to	help	you	get
better.”
Tina	 added,	 “Plus	 Henry’s	 doing	 it.	 You’ll	 be	 hanging	 out	 with
him	every	day	next	week.”
He	shook	his	head.	“No	way.	I	don’t	care.”	He	looked	down	at
his	plate,	and	a	hint	of	fear	crept	into	his	determined	voice.	“Please
don’t	make	me	do	this.”
Scott	and	Tina	exchanged	a	look	and	said	they’d	think	about	it
and	 continue	 the	 discussion	 later.	 But	 they	 were	 shocked.	 It	 was
absolutely	unheard	of	for	their	son	to	turn	down	any	activity	with
Henry,	his	best	friend,	especially	one	related	to	athletics.
Situations	like	this	come	up	all	the	time	for	parents,	where	they
are	 left	 completely	 ba�ed	 by	 the	 way	 their	 child	 responds	 to
something	 they	 say.	 When	 fear,	 anger,	 frustration,	 and	 other	 big
emotions	overpower	children	and	they	act	in	ways	that	don’t	make
sense,	there	may	be	an	easily	�xable	reason.	They	may	simply	be
hungry	 or	 tired.	 Or	 maybe	 they’ve	 been	 in	 the	 car	 too	 long.	 Or
maybe	it’s	just	because	they’re	two	(or	three,	or	four,	or	�ve—or
�fteen).	 But	 other	 times,	 a	 child	 acts	 out	 or	 behaves
uncharacteristically	because	of	more	deep-seated	reasons.
For	 example,	 as	 Tina	 and	 Scott	 spoke	 later	 that	 night,	 they
agreed	 that	 their	 son’s	 surprising	 right-brained	 response	 likely
resulted	 from	 a	 mildly	 traumatic	 experience	 he	 had	 undergone
three	years	earlier,	an	experience	he	probably	wasn’t	even	thinking
about.	Tina	knew	this	was	a	great	time	to	introduce	her	son	to	a
couple	of	important	facts	about	the	brain,	so	at	bedtime	that	night,
that’s	what	she	did.	Before	we	tell	you	about	that	conversation,	we
should	�rst	explain	what	Tina	was	trying	to	accomplish	when	she
talked	 to	 her	 son.	 She	 knew	 that	 one	 of	 the	 best	 ways	 to	 help	 a
child	 deal	 with	 di�cult	 experiences	 is	 to	 understand	 some	 basics
about	the	science	of	how	memory	works	in	the	brain.
MEMORY	AND	THE	BRAIN:	A	COUPLE	OF	MYTHS
Let’s	start	with	two	myths	about	memory.
Myth	#1:	Memory	is	a	mental	�le	cabinet.	When	you	think	back
about	your	�rst	date	or	the	birth	of	your	child,	you	just	open	the
appropriate	file	drawer	in	your	brain	and	call	up	that	memory.
It	would	be	nice	and	convenient	if	this	were	true,	but	that’s	just
not	 the	 way	 the	 brain	 works.	 There	 aren’t	 thousands	 of	 little
“memory	 �les”	 in	 your	 head	 waiting	 for	 you	 to	 access	 them	 and
bring	them	to	consciousness	so	you	can	think	about	them.	Instead,
memory	 is	 all	 about	 associations.	 As	 an	 association	 machine,	 the
brain	 processes	 something	 in	 the	 present	 moment—an	 idea,	 a
feeling,	a	smell,	an	image—and	links	that	experience	with	similar
experiences	 from	 the	 past.	 These	 past	 experiences	 strongly
in�uence	how	we	understand	what	we	see	or	feel.	That	in�uence
occurs	because	of	associations	in	the	brain,	where	di�erent	neurons
(or	 brain	 cells)	 become	 linked	 to	 each	 other.	 So,	 in	 essence,
memory	 is	 the	 way	 an	 event	 from	 the	 past	 in�uences	 us	 in	 the
present.
Imagine,	 for	 example,	 that	 you	 found	 an	 old	 paci�er	 between
your	couch	cushions.	What	kind	of	emotions	and	memories	would
you	 experience?	 If	 you	 still	 have	 a	 baby	 in	 the	 house,	 maybe
nothing	too	earth-shattering.	But	if	it’s	been	a	few	years	since	your
little	 one	 used	 a	 paci�er,	 then	 you	 might	 be	 �ooded	 with
sentimental	associations.	You	might	remember	how	giant	it	looked
in	your	newborn’s	mouth,	or	how	quickly	you	moved	the	�rst	time
your	toddler	shared	the	binky	with	the	dog.	Or	you	might	relive
that	 wretched	 night	 when	 you	 all	 said	 goodbye	 to	 paci�ers	 for
good.	 In	 the	 moment	 that	 you	 �nd	 the	 paci�er,	 all	 kinds	 of
associations	rush	back	into	your	awareness,	impacting	your	present
feelings	and	mood	based	on	strong	associations	from	the	past.	This
is	what	memory	essentially	is—association.
Without	 getting	 too	 complicated,	 here’s	 what	 goes	 on	 in	 the
brain.	 Anytime	 we	 undergo	 an	 experience,	 neurons	 “�re,”	 or
become	 activated	 with	 electrical	 signals.	 When	 these	 brain	 cells
�re,	they	become	linked	with	or	join	other	neurons.	These	linkages
create	associations.	As	we	explained	in	the	introduction,	this	means
that	every	experience	literally	changes	the	physical	makeup	of	the
brain,	 since	 neurons	 are	 constantly	 being	 connected	 (and
separated)	 based	 on	 our	 experiences.	 Neuroscientists	 explain	 this
process	with	the	phrase	“Neurons	that	�re	together	wire	together.”
In	 other	 words,	 every	 new	 experience	 causes	 certain	 neurons	 to
�re,	and	when	they	do,	they	wire	together,	or	link	up,	with	other
neurons	that	are	firing	at	the	same	time.
Doesn’t	this	�t	with	your	experience?	The	very	mention	of	biting
into	a	lemon	can	make	you	salivate.	Or	a	song	in	the	car	transports
you	back	to	an	awkward	slow	dance	in	high	school.
Or	 remember	 when	 you	 gave	 your	 four-year-old	 a	 piece	 of
bubble	gum	after	ballet	class	that	one	time?	And	what	did	she	want
and	expect	after	every	ballet	class	from	then	on?	Of	course.	Bubble
gum.	 Why?	 Because	 her	 end-of-ballet-class	 neurons	 had	 �red	 and
wired	 with	 her	 bubble-gum	 neurons.	 Neurons	 that	 �re	 together
wire	together.
That’s	 how	 memory	 works.	 One	 experience	 (the	 end	 of	 ballet
class)	 causes	 certain	 neurons	 to	 �re,	 and	 those	 neurons	 can	 get
wired	 to	 neurons	 from	 another	 experience	 (getting	 bubble	 gum).
Then	each	time	we	undergo	the	�rst	experience,	our	brain	connects
it	with	the	second	one.	Thus,	when	ballet	ends,	our	brain	triggers
an	 expectation	 of	 getting	 gum.	 The	 trigger	 might	 be	 an	 internal
event—a	thought	or	a	feeling—or	an	external	event	that	the	brain
associates	 with	 something	 from	 your	 past.	 Regardless,	 this
triggered	 memory	 then	 sets	 up	 expectations	 for	 the	 future.	 The
brain	 continually	 prepares	 itself	 for	 the	 future	 based	 on	 what
happened	 before.	 Memories	 shape	 our	 current	 perceptions	 by
causing	us	to	anticipate	what	will	happen	next.	Our	past	absolutely
shapes	 our	 present	 and	 future.	 And	 it	 does	 so	 via	 associations
within	the	brain.
Myth	#2:	Memory	is	like	a	photocopy	machine.	When	you	call	up
memories,	 you	 see	 accurate,	 exact	 reproductions	 of	 what	 took
place	in	the	past.	You	remember	yourself	on	your	�rst	date	with
ridiculous	 hair	 and	 clothes,	 and	 you	 laugh	 at	 your	 own
nervousness.	Or	you	see	the	doctor	holding	up	your	newborn	and
you	relive	the	intense	emotions	of	that	moment.
Again,	that’s	not	quite	how	it	happens.	Well,	the	ridiculous	hair
and	clothes	may	have	really	happened,	but	memory	is	not	an	exact
reproduction	 of	 events	 from	 your	 past.	 Whenever	 you	 retrieve	 a
memory,	you	alter	it.	What	you	recall	may	be	close	to	exactly	what
happened,	 but	 the	 very	 act	 of	 recalling	 an	 experience	 changes	 it,
sometimes	 in	 signi�cant	 ways.	 To	 put	 it	 scienti�cally,	 memory
retrieval	 activates	 a	 neural	 cluster	 similar	 to,	 but	 not	 identical
with,	the	one	created	at	the	time	of	encoding.	Thus	memories	are
distorted—sometimes	 slightly,	 sometimes	 greatly—even	 though
you	believe	you	are	being	accurate.
You’ve	had	those	conversations	with	your	sibling	or	your	spouse
where	after	you	tell	a	story	about	something,	they	say	“That’s	not
how	 it	 happened!”	 Your	 state	 of	 mind	 when	 you	 encoded	 the
memory	 and	 the	 state	 of	 mind	 you’re	 in	 when	 you	 recall	 it
in�uence	and	change	the	memory	itself.	So	the	story	you	actually
tell	is	less	history	and	more	historical	fiction.
Keep	these	two	myths	in	mind	as	we	talk	in	the	following	pages
about	your	kids	and	the	way	their	past	experiences	impact	them.
Remember	 that	 memory	 is	 all	 about	 linkages	 in	 the	 brain	 (as
opposed	 to	 being	 alphabetical	 �les	 to	 be	 accessed	 whenever
needed),	and	that	retrieved	memories	are	by	de�nition	vulnerable
to	 distortion	 (as	 opposed	 to	 being	 detail-for-detail	 accurate
photocopies	from	your	past).
THE	TRUTH	ABOUT	MEMORY:	LET’S	GET	EXPLICIT	(AND	IMPLICIT)
Think	 about	 your	 memory	 for	 changing	 a	 diaper.	 When	 you
approach	a	changing	table,	you	don’t	actively	talk	yourself	through
the	process:	“OK,	�rst	place	the	baby	on	the	pad.	Now	unzip	the
pajamas	and	remove	the	soggy	diaper.	Place	the	clean	diaper	under
the	baby	and	…”
No,	none	of	that’s	necessary	because	when	you	change	a	diaper,
you	just	do	it.	You’ve	done	it	so	many	times	before,	you	don’t	even
think	 about	 what	 you’re	 doing.	 Your	 brain	 �res	 o�	 clusters	 of
neurons	that	let	you	undo	the	tabs,	remove	the	diaper,	reach	for	a
baby	wipe,	and	so	on,	all	without	ever	even	realizing	that	you	are
“remembering”	 how	 to	 do	 it.	 That’s	 one	 kind	 of	 memory:	 past
experiences	(changing	diaper	after	diaper)	in�uence	your	behavior
in	 the	 present	 (changing	 this	 particular	 diaper)	 without	 any
realization	that	your	memory	has	even	been	triggered.
If,	on	the	other	hand,	you	think	about	that	day	you	�rst	changed
a	diaper,	you	might	pause	for	a	moment,	scan	your	memory,	and
come	 up	 with	 an	 image	 of	 yourself	 nervously	 gripping	 a	 baby’s
ankle,	 then	 cringing	 at	 the	 mess	 you	 �nd	 in	 the	 diaper,	 then
struggling	to	�gure	out	what	to	do	next.	When	you	actively	think
about	these	images	and	emotions,	then	you’re	aware	that	you	are
recalling	 something	 from	 the	 past.	 This	 is	 also	 memory—but	 it’s
di�erent	 from	 the	 memory	 that	 enables	 you	 to	 change	 a	 diaper
now	without	thinking	about	it.
These	 two	 types	 of	 memory	 interweave	 and	 work	 together	 in
your	 normal	 everyday	 living.	 The	 memory	 that	 enables	 you	 to
change	 your	 baby	 without	 knowing	 that	 you	 are	 remembering	 is
called	implicit	memory.	 Your	 ability	 to	 recall	 learning	 to	 change	 a
diaper	(or	to	recall	any	other	speci�c	moment)	is	explicit	memory.
Usually	when	we	talk	about	memory,	we	mean	what	is	technically
explicit	memory:	a	conscious	recollection	of	a	past	experience.	But
we	need	to	know	about	both	kinds	of	memory,	for	our	own	sake	as
well	as	for	that	of	our	children.	By	getting	a	clear	handle	on	these
two	di�erent	types	of	memory,	we	can	provide	our	kids	with	what
they	 need	 as	 they	 grow	 and	 mature	 and	 deal	 with	 di�cult
experiences.
Let’s	 start	 by	 focusing	 on	 implicit	 memories,	 which	 begin
forming	 even	 before	 we	 are	 born.	 Dan	 tells	 a	 story	 about	 an
informal	“research	study”	he	performed	in	his	own	family.
When	my	wife	was	pregnant	with	each	of	our	two	children,	I
used	to	sing	to	them	in	the	womb.	It	was	an	old	Russian	song
that	my	grandmother	had	sung	to	me,	a	child’s	song	about	her
love	 for	 life	 and	 for	 her	 mother—“May	 there	 always	 be
sunshine,	may	there	always	be	good	times,	may	there	always
be	Mama,	and	may	there	always	be	me.”	I	sang	it—in	Russian
and	in	English—during	the	last	trimester	of	pregnancy,	when	I
knew	 the	 auditory	 system	 was	 wired	 up	 enough	 to	 register
sound	coming	through	the	amniotic	fluid.
Then	in	the	�rst	week	after	each	child	was	born,	I	invited	a
colleague	 over	 for	 a	 “research	 study.”	 (I	 know,	 it	 wasn’t
controlled,	 but	 it	 was	 fun.)	 Without	 revealing	 the	 prenatal
song,	I	sang	three	di�erent	songs	in	turn.	No	doubt	about	it—
when	 the	 babies	 heard	 the	 familiar	 song,	 their	 eyes	 opened
wider	 and	 they	 became	 more	 alert,	 so	 that	 my	 colleague
could	 easily	 identify	 the	 change	 in	 their	 attention	 level.	 A
perceptual	 memory	 had	 been	 encoded.	 (Now	 my	 kids	 won’t
let	me	sing;	I	probably	sounded	better	underwater.)
Dan’s	 newborn	 children	 recognized	 his	 voice	 and	 the	 Russian
song	because	that	information	had	been	encoded	in	their	brain	as
implicit	 memories.	 We	 encode	 implicit	 memory	 throughout	 our
lives,	 and	 in	 the	 �rst	 eighteen	 months	 we	 encode	only	 implicitly.
An	 infant	 encodes	 the	 smells	 and	 tastes	 and	 sounds	 of	 home	 and
parents,	the	sensations	in	her	belly	when	she’s	hungry,	the	bliss	of
warm	 milk,	 the	 way	 her	 mother’s	 body	 sti�ens	 in	 response	 to	 a
certain	relative’s	arrival.	Implicit	memory	encodes	our	perceptions,
our	 emotions,	 our	 bodily	 sensations,	 and,	 as	 we	 get	 older,
behaviors	 like	 learning	 to	 crawl	 and	 walk	 and	 ride	 a	 bike	 and
eventually	change	a	diaper.
What’s	crucial	to	understand	about	implicit	memory—especially
when	it	comes	to	our	kids	and	their	fears	and	frustrations—is	that
implicit	memories	cause	us	to	form	expectations	about	the	way	the
world	 works,	 based	 on	 our	 previous	 experiences.	 Remember	 the
connection	between	ballet	and	bubble	gum?	Because	neurons	that
�re	together	wire	together,	we	create	certain	mental	models	based
on	 what’s	 gone	 on	 in	 the	 past.	 If	 you	 hug	 your	 toddler	 every
evening	when	you	come	home	from	work,	he’ll	have	a	model	in	his
mind	that	your	return	will	be	�lled	with	a�ection	and	connection.
This	is	because	implicit	memory	creates	something	called	“priming”
in	which	the	brain	readies	itself	to	respond	in	a	certain	way.	When
you	get	home,	your	son	anticipates	a	hug.	Not	only	is	his	internal
world	primed	for	receiving	that	loving	gesture,	he’ll	even	move	his
arms	in	anticipation	when	he	hears	your	car	in	the	driveway.	As	he
gets	 older,	 priming	 will	 continue	 to	 operate	 with	 more	 complex
behaviors.	A	few	years	later,	if	a	piano	teacher	frequently	criticizes
his	 playing,	 he	 may	 create	 a	 mental	 model	 that	 he	 doesn’t	 like
piano,	 or	 even	 that	 he’s	 not	 musical.	 A	 more	 extreme	 version	 of
this	process	occurs	in	the	case	of	post-traumatic	stress	disorder,	or
PTSD,	 where	 an	 implicit	 memory	 of	 a	 disturbing	 experience
becomes	encoded	in	a	person’s	brain,	and	a	sound	or	image	triggers
that	 memory	 without	 the	 person	 even	 realizing	 it’s	 a	 memory.
Implicit	memory	is	essentially	an	evolutionary	process	that	keeps
us	safe	and	out	of	danger.	It	frees	us	to	be	able	to	react	quickly,	or
even	automate	our	responses	in	moments	of	danger	without	having
to	actively	or	intentionally	recall	previous	similar	experiences.
What	all	this	means	for	us	as	parents	is	that	when	our	kids	seem
to	be	reacting	in	unusually	unreasonable	ways,	we	need	to	consider
whether	an	implicit	memory	has	created	a	mental	model	that	we
need	to	help	them	explore.	This	is	what	Tina	did	for	her	son	when
she	tucked	him	into	bed	and	talked	with	him	about	the	swimming
lessons.	Their	conversation	went	something	like	this:
TINA:				 Can	you	tell	me	anything	about	what’s	going	on	with	the
swimming?
SON:
I	don’t	know,	Mom.	I	just	don’t	want	to	do	it.
TINA:
Are	you	afraid	of	something?
SON:
I	guess.	I’ve	just	got	all	of	these	butterflies	in	my	stomach.
TINA:
So	let’s	talk	about	those	butterflies.	Did	you	know	that
your	brain	remembers	things	even	when	you	don’t	know
you’re	remembering?
SON:
I	don’t	get	it.
TINA:
OK.	Let	me	say	it	a	different	way.	Do	you	remember	you
had	a	bad	experience	with	swim	lessons	before?
SON:
Oh	yeah.
TINA:
Do	you	remember	that	place	we	went?
SON:
They	were	so	hard	on	us	there.
TINA:
Those	were	some	pretty	strict	teachers.
SON:
They	made	me	go	off	the	diving	board.	And	they	dunked
my	head	and	made	me	hold	my	breath	for	a	long	time.
TINA:
It	was	a	long	time,	wasn’t	it?	And	you	know	what?	I	think
that	has	a	lot	to	do	with	why	you	don’t	want	to	go	to	swim
lessons	now.
SON:
You	do?
Yes.	Do	you	know	that	lots	of	times	when	you	do	things,
TINA:
whether	they	are	good	or	bad,	your	brain	and	body
remember	them?	So	when	I	say	“Dodger
Stadium”	…	You’re	smiling!	Do	you	feel	what’s	going	on
inside	you	now?	What	are	your	brain	and	body	saying?
How	do	you	feel?
SON:
Excited?
TINA:
Yes.	I	can	see	that	on	your	face.	And	do	you	feel	butterflies
in	your	stomach?
SON:
No	way.
TINA:
And	what	about	when	I	say	“swimming	lessons”?	Does	that
change	how	you	feel?
SON:
Uh-huh.
TINA:
And	the	butterflies	are	back?
SON:
Right.	I	don’t	want	to	go.
TINA:
But	here’s	what	I	think	is	going	on.	Your	brain	is	amazing.
And	one	of	its	important	jobs	is	to	keep	you	safe.	See,	your
brain	is	always	checking	things	out	and	saying,	“This	is
good”	or	“This	is	bad.”	So	when	I	say	“Dodger	Stadium,”
your	brain	says,	“Good!	Let’s	go!	That’s	a	fun	place.”	But
when	I	say	“Swimming	lessons,”	your	brain	says,	“Bad	idea.
Don’t	go!”
SON:
Exactly.
TINA:
And	the	reason	your	brain	gets	so	excited	when	I	say
“Dodger	Stadium”	is	because	you’ve	had	good	experiences
there.	You	probably	don’t	remember	every	detail	of	every
game,	but	still,	you	just	have	a	good	overall	feeling	about
it.
You	can	see	how	Tina	introduced	this	issue,	just	setting	up	the
concept	that	certain	memories	can	a�ect	us	without	our	awareness
that	something	is	coming	from	the	past.	You	can	also	probably	see
why	her	son	was	nervous	about	swimming	lessons.	And	one	of	the
biggest	problems	was	that	he	had	no	idea	why	he	was	nervous.	He
knew	 only	 that	 he	 didn’t	 want	 to	 go.	 But	 when	 Tina	 explained
where	 his	 feelings	 were	 coming	 from,	 he	 began	 to	 develop	 some
awareness	that	let	him	take	control	over	what	was	happening	in	his
brain,	so	he	could	begin	to	reframe	his	experiences	and	his	feelings.
They	 talked	 some	 more,	 then	 Tina	 introduced	 him	 to	 some
practical	tools	he	could	use	when	he	started	feeling	nervous	about
swimming	lessons—some	of	the	very	tools	we’ll	discuss	with	you	in
a	few	pages.	Here’s	how	the	end	of	the	conversation	went.
TINA:				
OK,	so	now	you	know	that	the	reason	for	your	fear	is	that
you	had	bad	experiences	before.
SON:
Yeah,	I	guess.
But	you’re	older	and	wiser	now,	and	you	can	think	about
swimming	in	whole	new	ways.	So	let’s	do	a	couple	of
things	to	help	you	feel	better.	One	is	to	start	thinking	about
TINA:
all	the	memories	you	have	of	swimming	that	have	been
really	fun	and	good.	Can	you	think	of	a	good	swimming
experience?
SON:
Sure,	when	I	was	swimming	with	Henry	last	week.
TINA:
Right.	Good.	And	you	can	also	talk	to	your	brain.
SON:
Huh?
TINA:
Seriously.	In	fact,	this	is	one	of	the	best	things	you	can	do.
You	can	say,	“Brain,	thanks	for	trying	to	keep	me	safe	and
protect	me,	but	I	don’t	need	to	be	afraid	of	swimming
anymore.	These	are	new	lessons	with	a	new	teacher,	a	new
pool,	and	I’m	a	new	kid	who	already	knows	how	to	swim.
So,	brain,	I’m	just	going	to	blow	out	the	butterflies	from
my	stomach	with	some	big,	slow	breaths,	like	this.	And	I’m
going	to	focus	on	the	good	stuff	about	swimming.”	Does
that	seem	weird,	to	talk	to	your	brain	like	that?
SON:
Kind	of.
TINA:
I	know,	it’s	funny	and	kind	of	strange.	But	do	you	see	how
it	could	work?	What’s	something	you	could	tell	your	brain
to	make	your	body	calm	down	and	make	you	feel	safer	and
feel	good	about	going	to	swimming	lessons?	What	could
you	say	in	your	mind?
SON:
Those	bad	swimming	lessons	were	just	in	the	past.	Now
this	is	a	new	swim	lesson,	and	I	already	like	swimming.
TINA:
Exactly.	Because	how	do	you	feel	about	swimming	in
general?
SON:
Great.
TINA:
Great.	And	now	let’s	do	one	more	thing.	What’s	something
you	could	do	or	say	to	your	brain	if	you	start	feeling
nervous	again	when	we	first	get	to	swimming	lessons?	Like
a	code	to	help	remind	yourself	that	these	feelings	are	from
the	past?
SON:
I	don’t	know.	Kill	the	butterflies?
TINA:
Because	the	butterflies	are	from	a	long	time	ago	and	you
don’t	need	them	in	your	stomach	anymore,	right?
SON:
Right.
TINA:
I	love	it.	And	I’m	glad	you’re	laughing	about	it	now.	But
could	we	come	up	with	a	less	violent	code?	How	about
“Liberate	the	butterflies”	or	“Free	the	butterflies”?
SON:
I	kind	of	like	“kill.”
TINA:
OK.	“Kill	the	butterflies”	it	is.
Notice	that	the	main	thing	Tina	did	here	was	to	tell	the	story	of
where	 her	 son’s	 fears	 came	 from.	 She	 used	 narrative	 to	 help	 his
implicit	 memories	 become	 explicit	 and	 full	 of	 meaning,	 so	 they
wouldn’t	 act	 on	 him	 with	 such	 hidden	 power.	 Once	 his	 implicit
memories	 about	 the	 unpleasant	 swimming	 lessons	 were	 brought
into	 the	 light	 of	 awareness,	 he	 could	 pretty	 easily	 deal	 with	 his
present-day	 fears.	 It’s	 in	 this	 transformation—from	 implicit	 to
explicit—that	the	real	power	of	integrating	memory	brings	insight,
understanding,	and	even	healing.
INTEGRATING	IMPLICIT	AND	EXPLICIT:
ASSEMBLING	THE	PUZZLE	PIECES	OF	THE	MIND
Implicit	 memories	 are	 often	 positive	 and	 work	 in	 our	 favor,	 like
when	 we	 fully	 expect	 to	 be	 loved	 by	 those	 around	 us	 simply
because	 we’ve	 always	 been	 loved.	 If	 we	 count	 on	 our	 parents	 to
comfort	 us	 when	 we’re	 hurting,	 since	 they’ve	 always	 done	 so
before,	 that’s	 because	 a	 host	 of	 positive	 implicit	 memories	 have
been	stored	up	within	us.	But	implicit	memories	can	be	negative	as
well,	 like	 when	 we’ve	 repeatedly	 had	 the	 opposite	 experience	 of
our	 parents	 being	 irritated	 by	 or	 uninterested	 in	 our	 times	 of
distress.
The	problem	with	an	implicit	memory,	especially	of	a	painful	or
negative	experience,	is	that	when	we	aren’t	aware	of	it,	it	becomes
a	buried	land	mine	that	can	limit	us	in	signi�cant	and	sometimes
debilitating	 ways.	 The	 brain	 remembers	 many	 events	 whether
we’re	aware	of	them	or	not,	so	when	we	have	di�cult	experiences
—anything	from	a	twisted	ankle	to	the	death	of	someone	we	love
—these	painful	moments	get	embedded	in	the	brain	and	begin	to
a�ect	us.	Even	though	we’re	not	aware	of	their	origins	in	the	past,
implicit	 memories	 can	 still	 create	 fear,	 avoidance,	sadness,	 and
other	 painful	 emotions	 and	 bodily	 sensations.	 That	 helps	 explain
why	children	(as	well	as	adults)	often	react	strongly	to	situations
without	 being	 aware	 of	 why	 they	 are	 so	 upset.	 Unless	 kids	 can
make	sense	of	their	painful	memories,	they	may	experience	sleep
disturbances,	debilitating	phobias,	and	other	problems.
So	how	do	we	help	our	children	when	they’re	su�ering	from	the
e�ects	 of	 past	 negative	 experiences?	 We	 shine	 the	 light	 of
awareness	 on	 those	 implicit	 memories,	 making	 them	 explicit	 so
that	our	child	can	become	aware	of	them	and	deal	with	them	in	an
intentional	 way.	 Sometimes	 parents	 hope	 that	 their	 children	 will
“just	 forget	 about”	 painful	 experiences	 they’ve	 undergone,	 but
what	kids	really	need	is	for	parents	to	teach	them	healthy	ways	to
integrate	 implicit	 and	 explicit	 memories,	 turning	 even	 painful
experiences	into	sources	of	power	and	self-understanding.
There’s	a	part	of	our	brain	whose	very	job	is	to	do	just	that:	to
integrate	our	implicit	and	explicit	memories,	so	that	we	can	more
fully	 understand	 the	 world	 and	 ourselves.	 It’s	 called	 the
hippocampus,	 and	 it	 can	 be	 considered	 the	 “search	 engine”	 of
memory	retrieval.	The	hippocampus	works	with	di�erent	parts	of
our	 brain	 to	 take	 all	 of	 the	 images,	 emotions,	 and	 sensations	 of
implicit	memory	and	draw	them	together	so	that	they	can	become
the	assembled	“pictures”	that	make	up	our	explicit	understanding
of	our	past	experiences.
Think	of	the	hippocampus	as	a	master	puzzle	assembler	that	links
together	 the	 jigsaw	 pieces	 of	 implicit	 memory.	 When	 the	 images
and	 sensations	 of	 experience	 remain	 in	 implicit-only	 form,	 when
they	 haven’t	 been	 integrated	 by	 the	 hippocampus,	 they	 exist	 in
isolation	from	one	another	as	a	jumbled	mess	in	our	brain.	Instead
of	having	a	clear	and	whole	picture,	a	completed	jigsaw	puzzle,	our
implicit	 memories	 remain	 scattered	 puzzle	 pieces.	 We	 therefore
lack	 clarity	 about	 our	 own	 unfolding	 narrative,	 which	 explicitly
de�nes	 who	 we	 are.	 What’s	 worse,	 these	 implicit-only	 memories
continue	to	shape	the	way	we	look	at	and	interact	with	our	here-
and-now	reality.	They	a�ect	the	sense	of	who	we	are	from	moment
to	moment—all	without	our	even	being	aware	that	they	are	a�ecting
the	way	we	interact	with	our	world.
It’s	 crucial,	 therefore,	 that	 we	 assemble	 these	 implicit	 puzzle
pieces	 into	 explicit	 form	 in	 order	 to	 be	 able	 to	 re�ect	 on	 their
impact	 on	 our	 lives.	 That’s	 where	 the	 hippocampus	 comes	 in.	 By
performing	 the	 important	 function	 of	 integrating	 implicit	 and
explicit	memories,	it	allows	us	to	become	the	active	authors	of	our
own	 life	 stories.	 When	 Tina	 talked	 to	 her	 son	 about	 his	 fearful
associations	 with	 swim	 lessons,	 she	 was	 simply	 helping	 his
hippocampus	 do	 its	 job.	 It	 didn’t	 take	 much	 for	 his	 implicit
memories	to	become	explicit,	so	that	he	could	handle	his	fear	and
make	sense	of	both	his	painful	experience	in	the	past	and	how	it
was	still	affecting	him	in	the	present.
When	we	don’t	o�er	a	place	for	children	to	express	their	feelings
and	 recall	 what	 happened	 after	 an	 overwhelming	 event,	 their
implicit-only	memories	remain	in	dis-integrated	form,	leaving	the
children	with	no	way	to	make	sense	of	their	experience.	But	when
we	 help	 our	 kids	 integrate	 their	 past	 into	 their	 present,	 they	 can
then	make	sense	of	what’s	going	on	inside	them	and	gain	control
over	how	they	think	and	behave.	The	more	you	promote	this	type
of	 memory	 integration	 in	 your	 child,	 the	 less	 often	 you	 will	 see
irrational	 responses	 to	 what’s	 happening	 now	 that	 are	 really
leftover	reactions	from	the	past.
We’re	not	saying	that	memory	integration	is	a	parental	cure-all
that	will	prevent	all	outbursts	and	irrational	reactions.	But	it	is	a
powerful	tool	for	dealing	with	di�cult	experiences	from	the	past,
and	you’ll	be	grateful	to	know	about	it	the	next	time	your	child	is
struggling	 for	 some	 unknown	 reason.	 Granted,	 when	 your	 �ve-
year-old	can’t	�nd	the	taillight	to	complete	Luke	Skywalker’s	land
cruiser	 and	 launches	 into	 an	 out-of-control	 yelling	 �t	 about	 “the
stupid	Lego	store,”	that	may	have	nothing	to	do	with	some	sort	of
George	Lucas–inspired	implicit	memory.	In	fact,	before	you	over-
analyze	the	situation,	HALT	and	check	the	basics:	is	your	little	Jedi
simply	hungry,	angry,	lonely,	or	tired?	If	so,	these	problems	can	be
�xed	 pretty	 easily.	 Get	 him	 an	 apple.	 Listen	 to	 his	 feelings	 of
frustration.	 Spend	 a	 few	 minutes	 being	 with	 him,	 helping	 him
locate	the	missing	piece.	Put	him	to	bed	earlier	so	he	can	catch	up
on	 his	 rest	 and	 handle	 himself	 better	 tomorrow.	 Often	 kids	 are
doing	their	best;	they	just	need	us	to	attend	to	their	basic	needs.	As
you	learn	about	the	brain	and	consider	all	of	the	information	we’re
o�ering	here,	 don’t	 forget	 about	 the	 simple	 and	 the	 obvious,	 the
little	things	you	already	know.	Common	sense	can	take	you	a	long
way.
If,	though,	you	determine	that	something	bigger	is	going	on,	then
it’s	a	good	idea	to	think	back	to	experiences	in	the	past	that	might
be	a�ecting	the	present	situation.	You	may	not	always	be	able	to
tie	your	child’s	reactivity	to	a	speci�c	event	in	the	past,	so	don’t
force	a	connection	that’s	not	there.	But	if	you	feel	that	a	previous
event	 may	 be	 in�uencing	 your	 child’s	 actions,	 here	 are	 some
practical	ways	you	can	arm	him	with	tools	that	will	help	integrate
his	implicit	and	explicit	memories	and	achieve	more	control	in	the
way	he	responds	to	his	present	circumstances.
What	You	Can	Do:
Helping	Your	Child	Integrate	Implicit	and	Explicit	Memories
Whole-Brain	Strategy	#6:
Use	the	Remote	of	the	Mind:	Replaying	Memories
Once	again,	one	of	the	most	e�ective	ways	to	promote	integration
is	to	tell	stories.	In	chapter	2,	we	talked	about	the	importance	of
narrative	in	integrating	the	left	and	right	hemispheres.	Storytelling
is	 also	 a	 powerful	 activity	 for	 integrating	 implicit	 and	 explicit
memories.	 But	 sometimes,	 if	 a	 child	 is	 feeling	 the	 e�ects	 of	 an
especially	painful	experience	from	the	past,	she	may	not	be	ready
to	remember	the	entire	experience.	In	that	case,	you	can	introduce
her	to	her	internal	DVD	player,	which	comes	with	a	remote	control
that	lets	her	replay	an	experience	in	her	mind.	It	can	also	pause,
rewind,	and	fast-forward.	Just	like	you	might	fast-forward	through
the	scary	parts	of	a	movie	or	rewind	to	watch	your	favorite	scene
again,	the	remote	of	the	mind	is	a	tool	that	gives	your	child	some
control	 while	 revisiting	 an	 unpleasant	 memory.	 Here’s	 how	 one
father	used	this	technique.
David’s	 ten-year-old	 son,	 Eli,	 surprised	 him	 by	 saying	 that	 he
didn’t	want	to	race	a	Pinewood	Derby	car	this	year	with	his	Cub
Scout	troop.	David	was	taken	aback,	because	one	of	Eli’s	highlights
every	 winter	 was	 working	 alongside	 his	 dad	 as	 they	 carved,
shaped,	and	painted	a	block	of	pinewood	until	it	was	transformed
into	a	sports	car.	After	several	conversations,	David	realized	that
Eli	was	 unwilling	 to	 go	 anywhere	 near	 the	 woodworking	 tools,
especially	 the	 ones	 with	 blades.	 From	 there	 it	 was	 fairly	 easy	 to
make	 the	 connection	 between	 Eli’s	 new	 phobia	 and	 an	 episode
from	months	earlier.
The	previous	summer,	Eli	had	taken	his	pocketknife	to	the	park
without	 his	 parents’	 permission.	 He	 and	 his	 friend	 Ryan	 had
enjoyed	 cutting	 and	 whittling	 with	 the	 knife,	 until	 an	 accident
occurred.	 While	 cutting	 a	 root,	 Ryan	 had	 sliced	 through	 it	 and
jabbed	 the	 knife	 into	 his	 leg,	 leading	 to	 lots	 of	 blood	 and	 an
ambulance	ride	to	the	emergency	room.	A	few	stitches	later	he	was
�ne	and	didn’t	even	seem	too	traumatized	by	the	whole	event.	But
Eli	 was	 beyond	 distressed	 as	 he	 waited	 at	 his	 house,	 wondering
whether	 Ryan	 was	 OK.	 A	 compassionate,	 responsible	 boy,	 Eli
couldn’t	get	over	the	fact	that	it	was	his	knife,	taken	to	the	park
without	 permission,	 that	 had	 hurt	 his	 friend	 and	 caused	 so	 much
trouble.	 The	 parents	 of	 the	 two	 boys	 got	 them	 together	 that
evening	 and	 let	 them	 talk	 through	 what	 had	 happened,	 and	 both
apparently	 moved	 on.	 But	 now,	 months	 later,	 the	 memory	 was
clearly	working	on	Eli	again,	without	his	knowledge.	He	apparently
had	 no	 awareness	 that	 he	 was	 afraid	 of	 the	 woodworking	 tools
because	of	what	had	happened	with	Ryan	and	the	knife.
David	decided	to	help	Eli	take	that	implicit	memory	and	make	it
explicit.	He	called	his	son	out	to	the	garage,	where	he	had	his	tools
set	up.	As	soon	as	Eli	entered	the	garage	and	looked	at	the	electric
saw,	his	eyes	widened	and	his	dad	saw	fear	on	his	face.	He	tried	to
appear	normal	as	he	said,	“Dad,	I	don’t	want	to	do	the	Pinewood
Derby	this	year.”
David	responded	in	his	most	nurturing	voice.	“I	know,	son,	and	I
also	think	I	know	why.”
He	talked	to	Eli	about	the	connection	between	the	car	race	and
the	knife	accident,	but	Eli	resisted	this	explanation.	He	said,	“No,
that’s	not	it.	I’m	just	too	busy	with	school	right	now.”
But	David	pressed	him.	“I	know	you’re	busy,	but	I	think	there’s
more	to	it	than	that.	Let’s	just	talk	again	about	what	happened	that
day	at	the	park.”
Eli’s	face	again	showed	fear.	“Dad,	that	was	a	long	time	ago.	We
don’t	have	to	talk	about	it.”
David	 reassured	 him,	 then	 he	 taught	 him	 a	 powerful	 technique
for	dealing	with	painful	memories.	He	told	his	son,	“I’m	going	to
talk	through	the	story,	just	the	way	you	told	it	to	me	last	summer.
And	I	want	you	to	imagine	the	story	in	your	head,	as	if	you	were
watching	a	DVD	inside	your	brain.”
Eli	interrupted,	“Dad,	I	really	don’t	want	to.”
“I	know	you	don’t,”	David	said.	“But	this	is	where	the	good	part
comes	 in.	 I	 want	 you	 to	 imagine	 that	 you’re	 holding	 a	 remote
control,	 just	 like	 the	 one	 we	 use	 when	 we	 watch	 movies	 in	 the
house.	 And	 when	 I	 get	 to	 a	 part	 of	 the	 story	 you	 don’t	 want	 to
think	 about,	 you	 just	 hit	 pause.	 When	 you	 say	 ‘Pause,’	 I’ll	 stop.
Then	we	can	fast-forward	past	that	scene.	Can	we	do	that?”
Eli	said	slowly,	“OK”—the	way	kids	do	when	they’re	responding
to	a	request	they	think	is	crazy.
David	proceeded	to	tell	the	story.	He	told	about	Eli’s	arrival	at
the	park,	about	cutting	bark	with	Ryan,	and	so	on.	When	he	said,
“Then	Ryan	picked	up	a	root	and	started	to	cut	it,”	Eli	broke	in.
“Pause.”	He	said	it	quietly,	but	with	plenty	of	force.
David	said,	“OK.	Now	let’s	fast-forward	to	the	hospital.”
“Farther.”
“To	Ryan	coming	home?”
“Farther.”
“To	when	he	came	over	to	our	house	that	evening?”
“OK.”
David	 then	 narrated	 the	 happy	 reunion	 between	 the	 friends—
how	 they	 had	 greeted	 each	 other,	 then	 disappeared	 to	 go	 play
video	 games.	 David	 stressed	 that	 Ryan	 and	 his	 parents	 had
emphasized	that	they	weren’t	upset	with	Eli	and	that	they	viewed
the	whole	episode	as	an	accident.
David	looked	at	his	son.	“So	that’s	the	story,	right?”
“Yup.”
“Except	there’s	that	piece	we	left	out.”
“I	know.”
“Let’s	rewind	and	go	back	to	where	we	paused	and	look	at	what
happened.	And	remember,	we’ve	already	seen	that	the	story	has	a
happy	ending.”
“OK.”
David	took	Eli	through	the	more	painful	parts	of	the	narrative,
and	at	times	Eli	used	his	pause	button	again.	Eventually	they	made
it	through	the	story,	and	in	doing	so,	Eli	began	to	release	his	fears
associated	 with	 knives	 and	 cutting.	 By	 the	 time	 they	 returned	 to
the	 happy	 ending,	 David	 could	 see	 Eli’s	 muscles	 relax,	 and	 the
tension	in	his	voice	had	dramatically	decreased.	Over	the	coming
weeks	they	had	to	return	to	the	story	and	retell	it,	and	Eli	still	felt
somewhat	nervous	around	knives,	but	with	the	help	of	his	father,
Eli’s	hippocampus	integrated	his	implicit	memories	into	his	explicit
awareness.	As	a	result,	Eli	could	now	deal	with	the	issues	that	had
resurfaced.	He	and	his	dad	then	built	one	of	their	best	Pinewood
Derby	cars	ever—and	named	it	Fear	Factor,	writing	the	name	on
each	side	of	the	car	in	scary,	Halloween-style	letters.
Remember,	 your	 goal	 is	 to	 help	 your	 kids	 take	 the	 troubling
experiences	that	are	impacting	them	without	their	knowledge—the
scattered	puzzle	pieces	in	their	mind—and	make	those	experiences
explicit	 so	 that	 the	 whole	 picture	 in	 the	 puzzle	 can	 be	 seen	 with
clarity	 and	 meaning.	 By	 introducing	 them	 to	 the	 remote	 of	 the
mind,	 which	 controls	 their	 internal	 DVD	 player,	 you	 make	 the
storytelling	process	much	less	scary,	because	you	o�er	them	some
control	 over	 what	 they	 deal	 with,	 so	 they	 can	 interact	 with	 it	 at
their	own	pace.	They	can	then	look	at	an	experience	that	scared	(or
angered	or	frustrated)	them	without	having	to	immediately	relive
it	scene	for	scene.
Whole-Brain	Strategy	#7:
Remember	to	Remember:	Making	Recollection	a	Part	of	Your
Family’s	Daily	Life
The	 act	 of	 remembering	 comes	 naturally	 for	 most	 people.	 But
memory	 is	 like	 so	 many	 functions	 of	 the	 brain:	 the	 more	 we
exercise	it,	the	stronger	it	becomes.	That	means	that	when	you	give
your	children	lots	of	practice	at	remembering—by	having	them	tell
and	retell	their	own	stories—you	improve	their	ability	to	integrate
implicit	and	explicit	memories.
So	 our	 second	 suggestion	 is	 simply	 that	 you	 remember	 to
remember.	During	your	various	activities,	help	your	kids	talk	about
their	experiences,	so	they	can	integrate	their	implicit	and	explicit
memories.	This	is	especially	important	when	it	comes	to	the	most
important	and	valuable	moments	of	their	lives.	The	more	you	can
help	bring	those	noteworthy	moments	into	their	explicit	memory—
such	 as	 family	 experiences,	 important	 friendships,	 or	 rites	 of
passage—then	 the	 clearer	 and	 more	 in�uential	 those	 experiences
will	be.
There	 are	 plenty	 of	 practical	 ways	 to	 encourage	 your	 kids	 to
remember.	 The	 most	 natural	 is	 to	 ask	 questions	 that	 lead	 to
recollection.	 With	 very	 young	 children,	 keep	 things	 simple,
focusing	on	returning	their	attention	to	the	details	of	their	day.	Did
you	 go	 to	 Carrie’s	 house	 today?	 What	 happened	 when	 we	 got	 there?
Just	 recounting	 basic	 facts	 like	 this	 helps	 develop	 your	 child’s
memory	 and	 prepares	 her	 for	 interacting	 with	 more	 signi�cant
memories	down	the	road.
As	kids	get	older,	you	can	be	more	strategic	regarding	what	you
focus	on.	Ask	about	a	problem	they	had	with	a	friend	or	teacher,	a
party	they	went	to,	or	the	details	from	last	night’s	play	rehearsal.
Or	encourage	them	to	journal.	Studies	have	clearly	shown	that	the
very	 act	 of	 recalling	 and	 expressing	 an	 event	 through	 journaling
can	improve	immune	and	heart	function,	as	well	as	general	well-
being.	More	to	the	point	here,	though,	it	gives	kids	a	chance	to	tell
their	stories,	which	aids	them	in	the	meaning-making	process	that
improves	 their	 ability	 to	 understand	 their	 past	 and	 present
experiences.
When	 we	 speak	 to	 parents	 about	 memory	 integration	 and
encourage	them	to	help	their	kids	talk	about	their	experiences,	one
question	inevitably	comes	up:	What	if	they	won’t	talk?	 Or	What	if	I
ask	about	the	art	class,	and	all	they	say	is,	“It	was	OK”?	If	you	have
trouble	drawing	out	some	meaty	details	about	your	child’s	life,	be
creative.	One	trick	for	younger	school-age	kids	is	to	play	a	guessing
game	 when	 you	 pick	 them	 up	 from	 school.	 Say,	 “Tell	 me	 two
things	that	really	happened	today,	and	one	thing	that	didn’t.	Then
I’ll	guess	which	two	are	true.”	The	game	may	lack	a	certain	amount
of	 challenge	 for	 you—especially	 when	 your	 choices	 include	 “Ms.
Derrick	 read	 us	 a	 story,”	 “Me	 and	 Nico	 spied	 on	 the	 girls,”	 and
“Captain	 Hook	 captured	 me	 and	 fed	 me	 to	 the	 alligator”—but	 it
can	quickly	become	a	fun	game	that	kids	look	forward	to.	It	will
not	only	open	up	their	lives	to	you,	since	you	get	to	hear	about	two
of	their	memories	from	school	each	day,	but	it	can	also	help	them
get	used	to	thinking	back	and	reflecting	on	the	events	of	their	days.
Another	mom	who	had	recently	divorced	wanted	to	make	sure
that	 she	 stayed	 emotionally	 connected	 to	 her	 daughters	 as	 they
went	 through	 that	 di�cult	 period.	 So	 she	 began	 the	 ritual	 of
asking,	 as	 they	 ate	 dinner	 together	 each	 evening,	 “Tell	 me	 about
your	day.	Give	me	one	high	point,	one	low	point,	and	one	act	of
kindness	 you	 performed	 for	 someone.”	 Again,	 activities	 and
questions	like	these	not	only	encourage	recollection	but	also	push
children	 to	 think	 more	 deeply	 about	 their	 own	 emotions	 and
actions,	 about	 sharing	 their	 days	 with	 someone,	 and	 about	 how
they	can	help	others.
For	 speci�c	 events	 you	 want	 your	 child	 to	 think	 more	 about,
look	at	photo	albums	and	watch	old	videos.	One	great	way	to	help
them	 focus	 in	 more	 depth	 is	 to	 design	 and	 illustrate	 a	 “memory
book”	with	your	child.	For	example,	when	your	daughter	returns
from	her	�rst	sleepaway	camp,	you	can	collect	the	letters	she	sent
home,	pieces	of	memorabilia,	and	the	photos	she	took,	and	create	a
memory	book	with	her.	She	can	write	little	stories	and	notes	in	the
margins:	“This	was	my	cabin,”	or	“This	was	after	the	shaving-cream
�ght.”	Creating	a	book	like	this	prompts	your	daughter’s	memory
about	some	of	the	details	she	might	otherwise	lose	in	the	coming
months	and	years,	while	also	giving	her	the	opportunity	to	share
with	you	more	about	this	important	event	in	her	life.
Simply	by	asking	questions	and	encouraging	recollection,	you	can
help	 your	 kids	 remember	 and	 understand	 important	 events	 from
the	past,	which	will	help	them	better	understand	what’s	happening
to	them	in	the	present.
Whole-Brain	Kids:
Teach	Your	Kids	About	Making	Their	Implicit	Memories
Explicit
We’ve	 given	 you	 several	 examples	 of	 how	 to	 talk	 to	 your	 kids
about	implicit	and	explicit	memories.	If	you	notice	that	your	child
is	struggling	as	a	result	of	a	past	experience,	one	of	the	best	things
you	can	do	is	to	talk	to	him	and	help	him	retell	the	story	of	that
experience.	But	it	can	also	be	helpful	to	explain	what’s	happening
in	 the	 brain	 when	 a	 past	 experience	 begins	 to	 control	 present
behaviors	and	feelings.	You	might	explain	it	like	this:
Integrating	 Ourselves:	 Moving	 Our	 Own	 Memories	 from
Implicit	to	Explicit
Kids	aren’t	the	only	ones	whose	memories	can	intrude	on	their
lives	when	they	don’t	even	know	it.	It	happens,	of	course,	to
parents	 as	 well.	 Implicit	 memories	 in�uence	 our	 behaviors,
emotions,	 perceptions,	 and	 even	 physical	 sensations,	 and	 we
can	remain	completely	ignorant	of	the	past’s	in�uence	on	us	in
the	present	moment.	Dan	experienced	this	�rsthand	as	a	new
parent:
When	my	son	was	�rst	born	I	would	come	unglued	when
he	 cried	 inconsolably.	 I	 know	 a	 baby’s	 cry	 is	 hard	 for
anyone	to	hear,	but	I	just	couldn’t	take	it.	Panic	would
set	 in,	 and	 I’d	 become	 �lled	 with	 dread	 and	 terror.	 I
explored	 theory	 after	 theory	 for	 my	 intense	 and
seemingly	unwarranted	reaction,	but	none	of	them	rang
true.
Then	one	day	my	son	began	to	cry	and	an	image	came
to	my	mind.	It	was	a	small	boy	on	an	examining	table,
screaming,	 with	 a	 look	 of	 terror	 on	 his	 scrunched-up,
reddened	face.	I	was	next	to	him,	and	my	job,	as	a	young
pediatric	 intern	 at	 the	 UCLA	 Medical	 Center,	 was	 to
draw	blood	from	him	so	we	could	�gure	out	why	he	had
such	 a	 high	 fever.	 My	 pediatric	 partner	 and	 I	 had	 to
relive	this	horror	with	child	after	child,	one	of	us	holding
the	syringe,	the	other	holding	down	the	screaming	child.
I	 hadn’t	 thought	 about	 my	 pediatrics	 internship	 in
years.	 I	 remembered	 it	 as	 a	 good	 year	 overall,	 and	 I
recalled	being	glad	when	it	was	over.	But	the	middle-of-
the-night	 cries	 of	 my	 six-month-old	 son	 triggered	 my
�ashback	to	this	scene,	and	over	the	days	that	followed,
I	 began	 to	 understand	 the	 connection.	 I	 thought	 a	 lot
about	 those	 memories	 and	 talked	 to	 a	 few	 friends	 and
colleagues	about	my	experience.	It	began	to	be	clear	to
me	 that	 this	 trauma	 from	 years	 earlier	 had	 remained
implicit	and	was	surfacing	explicitly	only	now.	I	realized
that	I	had	completed	my	yearlong	internship	and	moved
on	to	the	next	phase	of	my	life,	never	having	consciously
re�ected	 on	 my	 painful	 experiences.	 I	 never	 processed
them	in	a	way	that	would	make	them	readily	available
for	later	explicit	retrieval.
Years	 later,	 then,	 as	 a	 young	 parent,	 I	 went	 through
the	painful	self-re�ection	that	allowed	me	to	see	this	as
an	unresolved	issue	in	myself,	and	I	was	able	to	hear	my
son’s	cries	for	what	they	were,	without	all	the	baggage
from	the	past.
Unexamined	(or	dis-integrated)	memories	cause	all	kinds	of
problems	for	any	adult	trying	to	live	a	healthy,	relational	life.
But	 for	 parents,	 these	 hidden	memories	 are	 especially
dangerous,	 for	 two	 main	 reasons.	 First	 of	 all,	 even	 when
they’re	 very	 young,	 our	 kids	 can	 pick	 up	 on	 our	 feelings	 of
dread	or	distress	or	inadequacy,	even	if	we	don’t	realize	we’re
experiencing	 them.	 And	 when	 a	 parent	 is	 upset,	 it’s	 very
di�cult	for	a	child	to	remain	calm	and	happy.	Second,	implicit
memories	can	trigger	responses	from	us	that	cause	us	to	act	in
ways	 we	 don’t	 want	 to.	 Old	 feelings	 of	 being	 left	 out,
abandoned,	or	put	down,	by	others	or	by	our	own	parents,	can
keep	 us	 from	 being	 mature,	 loving,	 and	 respectful	 when	 we
interact	with	our	kids.
So	the	next	time	you	�nd	yourself	reacting	a	bit	too	strongly
when	 you’re	 upset	 with	 your	 kids,	 ask	 yourself,	 “Is	 my
response	here	making	sense?”
The	answer	may	be,	“Yes.	The	baby’s	screaming,	my	three-
year-old	just	painted	the	oven	blue,	and	all	my	eight-year-old
is	 doing	 in	 response	 is	 turning	 up	 the	 TV.	 It	 makes	 perfect
sense	 that	 I	 feel	 like	 throwing	 something	 through	 the
window!”
At	 other	 times,	 though,	 the	 answer	 may	 be,	 “No,	 these
feelings	don’t	make	sense.	There’s	no	reason	for	me	to	take	it
personally	 that	 my	 daughter	 wants	 Daddy	 to	 read	 to	 her
tonight	instead	of	me.	I	don’t	need	to	be	this	upset.”	Based	on
what	 you	 now	 know	 about	 implicit	 memory,	 an	 insight	 like
this	 is	 an	 opportunity	 to	 look	 deeper.	 If	 you’re	 reacting	 in
ways	 you	 can’t	 explain	 or	 justify,	 it’s	 probably	 time	 to	 ask,
“What’s	 going	 on	 here?	 Is	 this	 reminding	 me	 of	 something?
And	where	in	the	world	are	my	feelings	and	behavior	coming
from?”	(We’ll	talk	more	about	this	process	in	the	“Integrating
Ourselves”	 section	 of	chapter	 6.	 Also,	 we	 recommend	 Dan’s
book	Parenting	from	the	Inside	Out,	written	with	Mary	Hartzell,
as	a	great	place	to	begin	this	journey	of	exploration.)
By	 integrating	 your	 implicit	 and	 explicit	 memories	 and
shining	the	light	of	awareness	on	di�cult	moments	from	your
past,	you	can	gain	insight	into	how	your	past	is	impacting	your
relationship	with	your	children.	You	can	remain	watchful	for
how	your	issues	are	a�ecting	your	own	mood	as	well	as	how
your	 kids	 feel.	 When	 you	 feel	 incompetent,	 frustrated,	 or
overly	reactive,	you	can	look	at	what’s	behind	those	feelings
and	explore	whether	they	are	connected	to	something	in	your
past.	 Then	 you	 can	 bring	 your	 former	 experiences	 into	 the
present	 and	 weave	 them	 into	 the	 larger	 story	 of	 your	 life.
When	you	do	that,	you	can	be	free	to	be	the	kind	of	parent
you	want	to	be.	You	can	make	sense	of	your	own	life,	which
will	help	your	kids	do	the	same	with	theirs.
CHAPTER	5
The	United	States	of	Me
Integrating	the	Many	Parts	of	the	Self
“Is	there	anything	Josh	can’t	do?”
This	 was	 the	 question	 other	 parents	 asked	 Amber	 about	 her
bright	 and	 talented	 eleven-year-old.	 Josh	 seemed	 to	 excel	 at
everything—school,	 sports,	 music,	 and	 social	 activities—and	 his
friends	and	their	parents	marveled	at	his	abilities.
Amber,	 however,	 knew	 that	 no	 matter	 how	 much	 success	 he
achieved,	 Josh	 struggled	 with	 serious	 doubts	 about	 his	 own	 self-
worth.	As	a	result,	he	felt	an	overpowering	need	to	be	perfect	at
everything	 he	 attempted.	 This	 perfectionism	 left	 him	 believing
that,	despite	his	many	successes,	nothing	he	did	was	good	enough.
He	 beat	 himself	 up	 emotionally	 whenever	 he	 made	 a	 mistake,
whether	it	was	missing	a	shot	in	a	basketball	game	or	forgetting	his
lunch	box	at	school.
Eventually	Amber	took	Josh	to	see	Tina,	who	soon	learned	that
his	parents	had	divorced	when	he	was	an	infant	and	his	father	had
disappeared,	leaving	him	to	be	raised	by	his	mother.	Over	time,	it
became	apparent	that	Josh	blamed	himself	for	his	father’s	absence,
believing	that	he	had	somehow	caused	his	dad	to	leave,	and	now
he	 did	 everything	 within	 his	 power	 to	 avoid	 making	 mistakes	 of
any	 kind.	 Josh’s	 implicit	 memory	 had	 equated	 not	 being	perfect
with	 abandonment.	 As	 a	 result,	 the	 thoughts	 running	 through	 his
head	on	a	daily	basis—“I	should’ve	done	better”;	“I’m	so	stupid”;
“Why	 did	 I	 do	 that?”—were	 keeping	 him	 from	 being	 a	 happy,
carefree	eleven-year-old.
Tina	 began	 working	 with	 Josh	 on	 paying	 attention	 to	 those
thoughts	 in	 his	 mind.	 Some	 were	 fueled	 by	 deeply	 embedded
implicit	memories	that	required	an	in-depth	approach	for	healing.
But	 she	 also	 helped	 him	 understand	 the	 power	 of	 his	 mind,	 and
how	by	directing	his	attention,	he	could	take	control	and,	to	a	great
extent,	actually	choose	how	he	felt,	and	how	he	wanted	to	respond
to	di�erent	situations.	For	Josh,	the	breakthrough	came	when	Tina
introduced	him	to	the	idea	of	mindsight.
MINDSIGHT	AND	THE	WHEEL	OF	AWARENESS
Dan	coined	the	term	“mindsight,”	and	as	he	explains	in	his	book	of
the	same	name,	the	simplest	meaning	of	the	word	comes	down	to
two	things:	understanding	our	own	mind	as	well	as	understanding
the	mind	of	another.	Connecting	with	others	will	be	the	focus	of
the	next	chapter.	For	now,	though,	let’s	focus	on	the	�rst	aspect	of
the	 mindsight	 approach,	 understanding	 our	 own	 mind.	 After	 all,
that’s	 where	 mental	 health	 and	 well-being	 begin,	 with	 achieving
clarity	 and	 insight	 into	 our	 own	 individual	 mind.	 That’s	 the	 idea
Tina	 began	 teaching	 Josh	 about.	 She	 introduced	 him	 to	 a	 model
that	Dan	created,	the	wheel	of	awareness.
The	basic	concept,	as	you	can	see	from	the	diagram	on	this	page,
is	that	our	mind	can	be	pictured	as	a	bicycle	wheel,	with	a	hub	at
the	 center	 and	 spokes	 radiating	 toward	 the	 outer	 rim.	 The	 rim
represents	anything	we	can	pay	attention	to	or	become	aware	of:
our	thoughts	and	feelings,	our	dreams	and	desires,	our	memories,
our	perceptions	of	the	outside	world,	and	the	sensations	from	our
body.
The	hub	is	the	inner	place	of	the	mind	from	which	we	become
aware	 of	 all	 that’s	 happening	 around	 and	 within	 us.	 It’s	 basically
our	prefrontal	cortex,	which	you’ll	remember	helps	to	integrate	the
whole	brain.	The	hub	represents	part	of	what’s	called	the	executive
brain,	because	it’s	from	this	place	that	we	make	our	best	decisions;
it’s	also	the	part	of	the	brain	that	allows	us	to	connect	deeply	to
others	 and	 to	 ourselves.	 Our	 awareness	 resides	 in	 the	 hub,	 and
from	 here	 we	 can	 focus	 on	 the	 various	 points	 on	 the	 rim	 of	 our
wheel.
The	 wheel-of-awareness	 model	 was	 immediately	 powerful	 for
Josh	since	it	allowed	him	to	recognize	that	the	di�erent	thoughts
and	 feelings	 giving	 him	 so	 much	 trouble	 were	 simply	 di�erent
aspects	of	himself.	They	were	just	a	few	particular	rim	points	on	his
wheel,	and	he	didn’t	have	to	give	them	so	much	attention.	(See	the
diagram	of	Josh’s	personal	wheel	of	awareness	on	this	page.)	Tina
helped	 him	 see	 that	 each	 set	 of	 rim	 points	 he	 focused	 on
determined	his	state	of	mind	at	any	given	moment.	In	other	words,
his	anxious	and	fearful	state	of	mind	came	about	because	he	was
focusing	on	a	set	of	anxiety-producing	rim	points—like	his	dread	of
receiving	a	B	on	his	homework,	or	his	worries	about	forgetting	the
notes	 during	 his	 band	 solo.	 Even	 the	 physical	 sensations	 he
experienced,	the	anxious	knot	in	his	stomach	and	the	tension	in	his
shoulders,	 were	 rim	 points	 that	 kept	 him	 focused	 on	 his	 fear	 of
failure.
Mindsight	let	him	see	what	was	happening	in	his	own	mind,	so
he	 could	 understand	 that	he	 was	 the	 one	 giving	 all	 this	 time	 and
energy	to	these	rim	points,	and	that	if	he	wanted,	he	could	return
to	his	hub,	where	he	could	see	the	big	picture	and	focus	on	other
rim	points	instead.	Those	fears	and	worries	were	de�nitely	part	of
him,	 but	 they	 didn’t	 represent	 the	 totality	 of	 his	 being.	 Instead,
from	 his	 hub	 at	 the	 center	 of	 the	 wheel,	 which	 was	 the	 most
thoughtful	and	objective	part	of	himself,	he	could	choose	how	much
attention	 to	 give	 them,	 as	 well	 as	 which	 other	 rim	 points	 he
wanted	to	focus	on.
As	Tina	explained	to	him,	in	giving	all	of	his	attention	to	these
few	fearful	rim	points,	Josh	was	excluding	many	other	rim	points
he	could	integrate	into	his	perspective	on	the	world.	That	left	him
spending	all	of	his	time	working	and	studying	and	practicing	and
worrying,	 when	 he	 could	 have	 been	 paying	 attention	 to	 other,
more	 productive	 rim	 points,	 like	 his	 con�dence	 in	 his	 musical
ability,	his	belief	that	he	was	smart,	and	his	desire	to	just	relax	and
have	fun	from	time	to	time.	Tina	explained	to	Josh	the	importance
of	integrating	the	di�erent	parts	of	himself,	the	unique	aspects	of
who	he	is,	so	that	a	few	of	them	didn’t	completely	dominate	all	of
the	others.	It	was	�ne,	she	told	him,	to	pay	attention	to	the	rim
points	that	pushed	him	to	achieve	and	excel.	These	were	good	and
even	 healthy	 parts	 of	 himself.	 But	 those	 points	 needed	 to	 be
integrated	with	the	others	so	that	he	didn’t	forsake	the	other	parts
of	himself,	which	were	also	good	and	healthy.
So	Josh	started	working	on	directing	his	focus	toward	points	that
didn’t	 necessarily	 lead	 to	 perfectionism.	 He	 began	 paying	 special
attention	to	the	part	of	himself	that	loves	just	hanging	out	with	his
friends	after	school,	even	if	that	meant	giving	up	some	study	time.
He	focused	on	his	newly	formed	belief	that	he	didn’t	have	to	be	the
leading	scorer	in	every	game.	And	he	used	his	self-talk	to	remind
himself	 how	 good	 he	 feels	 when	 he	 plays	 his	 saxophone	 just	 for
pleasure,	not	worrying	about	hitting	every	note	perfectly.	He	didn’t
have	to	stop	wanting	to	achieve	and	succeed.	He	just	needed	to	put
those	rim	points	into	context	with	the	others,	to	integrate	them	so
that	they	were	just	a	few	various	parts	of	a	much	greater	whole,	a
much	 bigger	 Josh	 than	 the	 one	 who	 would	 criticize	 himself	 for
every	little	mistake.
Learning	about	mindsight	and	the	wheel	of	awareness	didn’t,	of
course,	 immediately	 alleviate	 Josh’s	 drive	 toward	 perfectionism.
But	 it	 did	 help	 him	 begin	 to	 accept	 that	 he	 didn’t	 have	 to	 stay
miserable.	He	saw	that	he	could	make	choices	to	improve	di�cult
circumstances	by	making	decisions	that	little	by	little	allowed	him
to	take	control	of	how	he	experienced	and	responded	to	di�erent
situations.
(He	and	Tina	did	have	to	laugh	together,	though,	when	he	began
to	feel	frustrated	with	himself	when	he	wasn’t	perfect	at	worrying
less	about	being	perfect.)
STUCK	ON	THE	RIM:	DISTINGUISHING	BETWEEN	“FEEL”	AND	“AM”
Josh’s	 su�ering	 was	 a	 result	 of	 being	 “stuck	 on	 the	 rim”	 of	 the
wheel	of	awareness.	Rather	than	perceiving	his	world	from	his	hub
and	integrating	his	many	rim	points,	he	directed	all	of	his	attention
toward	just	a	few	particular	rim	points	that	created	an	anxious	and
critical	state	of	mind.	As	a	result,	he	lost	touch	with	many	of	the
other	 parts	 of	 the	 rim	 that	 could	 help	 him	 experience	 a	 more
peaceful	and	accepting	state	of	mind.	This	is	what	happens	when
kids	 aren’t	 working	 from	 an	 integrated	 wheel	 of	 awareness.	 Just
like	adults,	they	can	become	stuck	on	certain	rim	points,	on	one	or
a	 few	 particular	 aspects	 of	 their	 being,	 which	 often	 leads	 to
experiencing	rigidity	or	chaos.
This	 leaves	 them	 confusing	 the	 di�erence	 between	 “feel”	 and
“am.”	When	children	experience	a	particular	state	of	mind,	such	as
feeling	 frustrated	 or	 lonely,	 they	 may	 be	 tempted	 to	 de�ne
themselves	 based	 on	 that	 temporary	 experience,	 as	 opposed	 to
understanding	 that	 that’s	 simply	 how	 they	 feel	at	 the	 moment.
Instead	of	saying,	“I	feel	lonely”	or	“I	feel	sad	right	now,”	they	say,
“I	am	lonely”	or	“I	am	sad.”	The	danger	is	that	the	temporary	state
of	 mind	 can	 be	 perceived	 as	 a	 permanent	 part	 of	 their	 self.	 The
state	comes	to	be	seen	as	a	trait	that	defines	who	they	are.
Imagine,	for	instance,	a	nine-year-old	who	is	struggling	with	her
homework,	even	though	school	usually	comes	fairly	easily	to	her.
Unless	 she	 integrates	 her	 feelings	 of	 frustration	 and	 inadequacy
with	the	other	parts	of	herself—realizing	that	one	emotion	is	just	a
part	of	a	larger	whole	of	who	she	is—she	might	begin	to	look	at
this	momentary	state	as	a	more	permanent	trait	or	characteristic	of
her	 personality.	 She	 might	 say	 something	 like,	 “I’m	 so	 stupid.
Homework	is	too	hard	for	me.	I’ll	never	get	it	right.”
But	 if	 her	 parents	 can	 help	 her	 integrate	 the	 many	 parts	 of
herself,	recognizing	the	various	rim	points	on	her	wheel,	she	can
avoid	identifying	solely	with	this	one	particular	feeling	in	this	one
particular	moment.	She	can	develop	the	mindsight	to	realize	that
she’s	 frustrated	 about	 struggling	 in	 this	 moment,	 but	 it	 doesn’t
mean	that	she’s	dumb	or	that	she’ll	always	have	trouble.	From	the
hub	of	her	mind,	she	can	notice	various	rim	points	and	realize	that
even	though	she’s	struggling	at	the	moment,	she	has	demonstrated
in	 the	 past	 that	 she	 can	 usually	 handle	 homework	 without	 this
much	trouble.	She	might	even	use	some	healthy	self-talk,	saying	to
herself,	“I	hate	this	homework!	It’s	driving	me	crazy!	But	I	know
I’m	smart.	It’s	just	that	this	assignment	is	really	hard.”	The	simple
act	of	acknowledging	di�erent	points	along	the	rim	can	take	her	a
long	way	toward	gaining	control	and	shifting	her	negative	feelings.
She	may	still	feel	dumb,	but	with	her	parents’	help	and	with	some
practice,	 she’ll	 be	 able	 to	 avoid	 seeing	 that	 temporary	 state	 as	 a
permanent,	self-defining	trait.
This	 is	 one	 of	 the	 best	 things	 the	 wheel	 of	 awareness	 does:	 it
teaches	kids	that	they	have	choices	about	what	they	focus	on	and
where	they	place	their	attention.	It	gives	them	a	tool	that	lets	them
integrate	 the	 di�erent	 parts	 of	 themselves,	 so	 they	 aren’t	 held
hostage	 by	 one	 negative	 constellation	 of	 feelings	 or	 thoughts
clamoring	for	their	attention.	When	children	(and	adults,	for	that
matter)	 can	 develop	 this	 type	 of	 mindsight,	 they	 become
empowered	 to	 make	 choices	 that	 allow	 them	 to	 manage	 their
experiences	as	well	as	how	they	respond	to	their	world.	Over	time,
with	practice,	they	learn	to	direct	their	attention	in	ways	that	are
most	helpful	to	themselves	and	to	those	around	them,	even	during
difficult	moments.
THE	POWER	OF	FOCUSED	ATTENTION
To	understand	why	mindsight	o�ers	such	empowering	choices,	it’s
helpful	 to	 understand	 what	 happens	 in	 the	 brain	 when	 a	 person
concentrates	on	one	particular	set	of	rim	points.	As	we’ve	discussed
already,	 the	 brain	 physically	 changes	 in	 response	 to	 new
experiences.	With	intention	and	e�ort,	we	can	acquire	new	mental
skills.	What’s	more,	when	we	direct	our	attention	in	a	new	way,
we	are	actually	creating	a	new	experience	that	can	change	both	the
activity	and	ultimately	the	structure	of	the	brain	itself.
Here’s	 how	 it	 works.	 When	 we	 have	 a	 new	 experience	 or
concentrate	on	something—say,	on	how	we	feel	or	a	goal	we’d	like
to	 achieve—that	 activates	 neural	 �ring.	 In	 other	 words,	 neurons
(our	brain	cells)	spring	into	action.	This	neural	�ring	leads	to	the
production	 of	 proteins	 that	 enable	 new	 connections	 to	 be	 wired
among	 the	 activated	 neurons.	 Remember,	 neurons	 that	 �re
together	wire	together.	This	entire	process—from	neural	activation
to	 neural	 growth	 and	 strengthened	 connections—is	neuroplasticity.
Essentially,	 it	 means	 that	 the	 brain	 itself	 is	 plastic,	 or	 changing,
based	on	what	we	experience,	and	what	we	give	our	attention	to.
And	these	new	neural	connections,	created	when	we	pay	attention
to	something,	in	turn	alter	the	way	we	respond	to	and	interact	with
our	world.	This	is	how	practice	can	become	a	skill	and	how	a	state
can	become	a	trait,	for	good	or	for	bad.
There’s	 a	 lot	 of	 scienti�c	 evidence	 demonstrating	 that	 focused
attention	leads	to	the	reshaping	of	the	brain.	In	animals	rewarded
for	noticing	sound	(to	hunt	or	to	avoid	being	hunted,	for	example),
we	 �nd	 much	 larger	 auditory	 centers	 in	 the	 brain.	 In	 animals
rewarded	for	sharp	eyesight,	the	visual	areas	are	larger.	Brain	scans
of	violinists	provide	more	evidence,	showing	dramatic	growth	and
expansion	 in	 regions	 of	 the	 cortex	 that	 represent	 the	 left	 hand,
which	has	to	�nger	the	strings	precisely,	often	at	very	high	speed.
Other	studies	have	shown	that	the	hippocampus,	which	is	vital	for
spatial	 memory,	 is	 enlarged	 in	 taxi	 drivers.	 The	 point	 is	 that	 the
physical	architecture	of	the	brain	changes	according	to	where	we
direct	our	attention	and	what	we	practice	doing.
We	recently	saw	this	principle	at	work	in	Jason,	a	six-year-old.
At	 times	 Jason	 would	 obsess	 about	 irrational	 fears,	 and	 it	 was
driving	 his	 parents	 crazy.	 Eventually	 he	 began	 having	 trouble
sleeping	 because	 he	 was	 afraid	 the	 ceiling	 fan	 in	 his	 bedroom
would	 come	 crashing	 down	 on	 him.	 His	 parents	 had	 repeatedly
shown	 him	 how	 securely	 the	 fan	 was	 attached	 and	 logically
explained	 how	 safe	 he	 was	 in	 his	 bed.	 But	 the	 thoughts	 from	 his
rational,	 logical	 upstairs	 brain	 were	 being	 hijacked	 each	 night	 by
the	 fears	 in	 his	 downstairs	 brain.	 He	 would	 lie	 awake	 long	 past
bedtime	worrying	what	would	happen	if	the	screws	came	loose	and
the	 twirling	 blades	 descended	 on	 him,	 chopping	 into	 pieces	 his
body,	his	bed,	and	his	Darth	Vader	sheets.
Once	 his	 parents	 learned	 about	 mindsight	 and	 explained	 the
wheel	of	awareness	to	him,	Jason	suddenly	had	a	valuable	tool	that
o�ered	relief	not	only	to	himself	but	also	to	his	whole	family.	He
saw	that,	like	Josh,	he	had	become	stuck	on	his	rim,	�xating	on	his
fear	of	what	might	happen	if	the	ceiling	fan	fell.	His	parents	helped
him	 get	 back	 to	 his	 hub	 where	 he	 could	 recognize	 the	 physical
sensations	 that	 signaled	 that	 this	 obsession	 was	 creeping	 into	 his
mind—the	 anxious	 feelings	 in	 his	 chest,	 the	 tension	 in	 his	 arms,
legs,	 and	 face—so	 he	 could	 then	 direct	 his	 attention	 toward
something	that	would	relax	him.	Then	he	could	take	the	next	steps
to	 bring	 together	 the	 di�erent	 parts	 of	 himself.	 He	 could	 think
about	 other	 rim	 points:	 his	 con�dence	 that	 his	 parents	 would
protect	him	and	would	never	let	him	sleep	beneath	a	fan	that	might
fall	and	hurt	him,	or	his	memory	of	how	much	fun	he’d	had	that
day	digging	the	huge	hole	in	the	backyard.	Or	he	could	focus	on	the
tension	 he	 felt	 in	 his	 body	 and	 use	 some	 guided	 imagery	 to	 help
himself	relax.	Jason	loves	to	�sh,	so	he	learned	to	picture	himself
in	a	boat	with	his	father.	(We’ll	say	more	about	this	technique	in	a
minute.)
Again,	it	all	comes	back	to	awareness.	By	becoming	aware	that
he	was	stuck	on	one	part	of	the	rim	of	his	wheel,	and	realizing	that
he	
had	
other	
options	
regarding	
where	
he	
directed	
his
concentration,	 Jason	 learned	 to	 shift	 his	 focus	 and	 therefore	 his
mental	state.	That	meant	he	could	then	make	decisions	that	made
life	much	easier	for	both	himself	and	his	family.	They	all	survived
this	difficult	phase	without	having	to	remove	the	ceiling	fan.
But	 once	 again,	 integration	 led	 not	 only	 to	 surviving,	 but	 to
thriving	 as	 well.	 Mindsight	 wasn’t	 just	 a	 Band-Aid	 for	 Jason	 that
helped	 him	 and	 his	 parents	 deal	 with	 one	 particular	 di�cult
nighttime	 obstacle.	 It	 also	 produced	 a	 more	 fundamental	 change
that	 will	 create	 bene�ts	 long	 into	 adulthood.	 In	 other	 words,
learning	 to	 use	 the	 wheel	 of	 awareness	 and	 change	 where	 his
attention	was	directed	naturally	changed	Jason’s	perspective—but
it	did	much	more	than	that.	As	Jason,	even	at	such	a	young	age,
understood	this	principle	and	practiced	concentrating	on	other	rim
points,	the	neurons	in	his	brain	�red	in	new	ways	and	made	new
connections.	These	new	�rings	and	wirings	changed	the	makeup	of
his	 brain	 and	 left	 him	 less	 vulnerable	 not	 only	 to	 this	 particular
fear	 and	 this	 particular	 obsession,	 but	 to	 future	 fears	 and
obsessions	 as	 well—like	 when	 he	 felt	 petri�ed	 about	 singing
onstage	 for	 the	 holiday	 concert	 at	 his	 school,	 and	 nervous	 about
going	 on	 a	 sleepover	 at	 his	 friend’s	 house.	 Mindsight,	 along	 with
the	awareness	it	brought,	actually	changed	Jason’s	brain.	Because
of	 his	 nature,	 he	 may	 continue	 to	 deal	 with	 certain	 worries	 that
come	with	his	personality.	But	for	the	rest	of	his	life,	he’ll	reap	the
bene�t	 of	 this	 whole-brain	 work	 he’s	 done	 as	 a	 young	 child,	 and
he’ll	 have	 at	 his	 disposal	 a	 powerful	 tool	 for	 dealing	 with	 other
fears	and	obsessions.
As	 Jason’s	 mother	 and	 father	 found	 out,	 mindsight	 can	 be	 a
thrilling	discovery	for	parents,	especially	when	they	see	the	power
of	 integration	 at	 work	 in	 their	 child’s	 life.	 It’s	 very	 exciting	 to
understand	(and	to	teach	our	kids)	that	we	can	use	our	minds	to
take	 control	 of	 our	 lives.	 By	 directing	 our	 attention,	 we	 can	 go
from	being	influenced	by	factors	within	and	around	us	to	influencing
them.	 When	 we	 become	 aware	 of	 the	 multitude	 of	 changing
emotions	 and	 forces	 at	 work	 around	 us	 and	 within	 us,	 we	 can
acknowledge	them	and	even	embrace	them	as	parts	of	ourselves—
but	we	don’t	have	to	allow	them	to	bully	us	or	de�ne	us.	We	can
shift	our	focus	to	other	rim	points	on	the	wheel	of	awareness,	so
that	 we	 are	 no	 longer	 victims	 of	 forces	 seemingly	 beyond	 our
control,	 but	 active	 participants	 in	 the	 process	 of	 deciding	 and
affecting	how	we	think	and	feel.
What	an	amazing	power	to	bestow	on	your	children!	When	they
understand	some	basic	mindsight	principles—and	kids	can	often	get
the	 wheel	 of	 awareness	 idea	 at	 a	 very	 young	 age,	 even	 at	 the
beginning	 of	 elementary	 school—they	 are	 empowered	 to	 more
fully	regulate	their	own	bodies	and	minds	and	actually	change	the
way	 they	 experience	 di�erent	 life	 situations.	 Their	 downstairs
brain	 and	 implicit	 memories	 will	 control	 them	 less,	 and	 their
mindsight	 will	 help	 them	 live	 full	 and	 healthy	 lives	 from	 an
integrated	brain.
But	what	if	children	get	stuck	on	the	rim	and	can’t	seem	to	get
back	to	their	hub?	In	other	words,	what	if	they	can’t	seem	to	bring
together	 the	 di�erent	 parts	 of	 themselves	 because	 they	 are	 so
�xated	on	one	particular	state	of	mind?	As	parents,	we	know	that
this	“stuckness”	happens	all	the	time.	Just	think	about	Josh	and	his
perfectionism.	 Even	 once	 he	 understands	 about	 the	 wheel	 of
awareness	and	the	di�erent	parts	of	himself,	his	need	to	excel	may
still	overpower	him	at	times.	The	same	goes	for	Jason	and	his	fear
of	 the	 ceiling	 fan.	 An	 awareness	 of	 mindsight	 and	 the	 wheel	 of
awareness	 can	 be	 very	 powerful,	 but	 that	 doesn’t	 mean	 kids	 can
easily	 switch	 the	 focus	 of	 their	 attention	 onto	 another	 rim	 point
and	move	on	with	their	lives.
So	how	can	we	help	our	kids	increasingly	integrate	the	di�erent
parts	 of	 themselves	 and	 become	 unstuck	 on	 rim	 points	 that	 are
limiting	them?	How	can	we	help	them	develop	mindsight	so	they
can	 more	 and	 more	 access	 its	 power	 to	 control	 their	 own	 lives?
Let’s	talk	about	a	few	ways	you	can	introduce	mindsight	to	your
kids	and	help	them	build	skills	they	can	use	on	a	daily	basis.
What	You	Can	Do:
Introducing	Your	Child	to	the	Power	of	Mindsight
Whole-Brain	Strategy	#8:
Let	the	Clouds	of	Emotions	Roll	By:	Teaching	That	Feelings
Come	and	Go
As	we’ve	said	repeatedly	in	our	journey	through	this	book,	it’s	very
important	that	kids	learn	about	and	understand	their	feelings.	But
it’s	also	true	that	feelings	need	to	be	recognized	for	what	they	are:
temporary,	changing	conditions.	They	are	states,	not	traits.	They’re
like	 the	 weather.	 Rain	 is	 real,	 and	 we’d	 be	 foolish	 to	 stand	 in	 a
downpour	and	act	as	if	it	weren’t	actually	raining.	But	we’d	be	just
as	foolish	to	expect	that	the	sun	will	never	reappear.
We	 need	 to	 help	 children	 understand	 that	 the	 clouds	 of	 their
emotions	can	(and	will)	roll	on	by.	They	won’t	feel	sad	or	angry	or
hurt	 or	 lonely	 forever.	 This	 is	 a	 di�cult	 concept	 for	 kids	 to
understand	 at	 �rst.	 When	 they	 hurt	 or	 when	 they’re	 scared,	 it’s
sometimes	hard	for	them	to	imagine	that	they	won’t	always	su�er.
Taking	 the	 long	 view	 isn’t	 usually	 that	 easy	 even	 for	 an	 adult,
much	less	a	young	child.
So	we	have	to	help	them	understand	that	feelings	are	temporary
—on	average,	an	emotion	comes	and	goes	in	ninety	seconds.	If	we
can	 communicate	 to	 our	 children	 how	 �eeting	 most	 feelings	 are,
then	we	can	help	them	develop	the	mindsight	on	display	in	the	boy
we	 mentioned	 earlier	 who	 corrected	 himself	 and	 said,	 “I’m	 not
dumb;	I	just	feel	dumb	right	now.”
Younger	 kids	 will	 obviously	 need	 your	 help,	 but	 they	 can
certainly	grasp	the	idea	that	feelings	come	and	go.	The	more	kids
understand	that	feelings	come	and	go,	the	less	they’ll	get	stuck	on
the	rim	of	their	wheel,	and	the	more	they’ll	be	able	to	live	life	and
make	decisions	from	their	hub.
Whole-Brain	Strategy	#9:
SIFT:	Paying	Attention	to	What’s	Going	On	Inside
In	 order	 for	 kids	 to	 develop	 mindsight	 and	 then	 in�uence	 the
di�erent	 thoughts,	 desires,	 and	 emotions	 whirling	 around	 within
them,	 they	 �rst	 need	 to	 become	 aware	 of	 what	 it	 is	 they	 are
actually	 experiencing.	 That	 means	 one	 of	 our	 most	 important
parenting	jobs	is	to	help	our	children	recognize	and	understand	the
different	rim	points	of	their	individual	wheel	of	awareness.
You	 don’t	 have	 to	 have	 a	 serious	 sit-down	 meeting	 to
communicate	this	idea.	Find	ways	to	work	with	the	concept	during
your	 daily	 interactions	 with	 your	 kids.	 Tina	 recently	 decided	 the
idea	would	be	helpful	in	changing	her	seven-year-old	son’s	mood	as
she	was	driving	him	to	school	one	morning.	He	was	upset	that	his
trip	 to	 Dodger	 Stadium	 had	 been	 postponed,	 so	 she	 took	 the
opportunity	 to	 introduce	 him	 to	 the	 “windshield	 of	 awareness”:
“Look	at	all	the	spots	on	our	windshield.	These	spots	are	like	all
the	di�erent	things	you	are	thinking	and	feeling	right	now.	There
are	a	lot!	See	this	smudge	right	here?	That’s	how	mad	you	feel	at
Dad	 right	 now.	 And	 those	 yellow	 bug	 guts?	 That’s	 your
disappointment	 that	 you’re	 not	 going	 to	 get	 to	 go	 to	 the	 game
tonight.	 But	 see	 that	 splat	 right	 there?	 That’s	 how	 much	 you
believe	Dad	when	he	says	he’ll	take	you	next	weekend.	And	that
one	there	is	how	you	know	you	can	have	a	good	day	today	anyway
because	you	get	to	eat	lunch	and	play	kickball	at	recess	with	Ryan.
…”	You	can	use	anything	available	to	you:	a	windshield,	an	actual
bicycle	wheel,	a	piano	keyboard,	or	whatever	is	nearby.	Just	help
your	kids	understand	that	there	are	many	parts	of	themselves	that
they	can	get	to	know	and	integrate	with	one	another.
One	of	the	best	ways	to	begin	orienting	kids	to	what’s	on	their
rim	 is	 to	 help	 them	 learn	 to	 SIFT	 through	 all	 the	 sensations,
images,	 feelings,	 and	 thoughts	 that	 are	 a�ecting	 them.	 By	 paying
attention	 to	 their	 physical	sensations,	 for	 example,	 children	 can
become	much	more	aware	of	what’s	going	on	inside	their	bodies.
They	 can	 learn	 to	 recognize	 stomach	 butter�ies	 as	 markers	 of
anxiety,	a	desire	to	hit	as	anger	or	frustration,	heavy	shoulders	as
sadness,	and	so	on.	They	can	identify	tension	in	their	body	when
they’re	nervous,	then	learn	to	relax	their	shoulders	and	take	deep
breaths	to	calm	themselves.	Simply	recognizing	di�erent	sensations
like	 hunger,	 tiredness,	 excitement,	 and	 grumpiness	 can	 give
children	 a	 great	 deal	 of	 understanding	 and	 ultimately	 in�uence
over	their	feelings.
In	addition	to	sensations,	we	need	to	teach	our	kids	to	SIFT	for
images	that	are	a�ecting	the	way	they	look	at	and	interact	with	the
world.	Some	images	remain	from	the	past,	like	the	memory	of	a
parent	on	a	hospital	gurney,	or	an	embarrassing	moment	at	school.
Others	 might	 be	 fabricated	 from	 their	 imaginations	 or	 even
nightmares	they’ve	had.	A	child	who	worries	about	being	left	out
and	 isolated	 at	 recess	 might,	 for	 example,	 picture	 herself	 on	 a
lonely	 swing	 by	 herself.	 Or	 another	 child	 might	 struggle	 with
nighttime	 fears	 as	 a	 result	 of	 the	 images	 he	 remembers	 from	 a
scary	dream.	When	a	child	becomes	aware	of	the	images	that	are
active	in	his	mind,	he	can	use	his	mindsight	to	take	control	of	those
images	and	greatly	diminish	the	power	they	have	over	him.
Kids	can	also	be	taught	to	SIFT	for	feelings	and	emotions	they	are
experiencing.	Take	time	to	ask	kids	how	they	feel,	and	help	them
be	speci�c,	so	they	can	go	from	vague	emotional	descriptors	like
“�ne”	 and	 “bad”	 to	 more	 precise	 ones,	 like	 “disappointed,”
“anxious,”	 “jealous,”	 and	 “excited.”	 One	 reason	 kids	 often	 don’t
express	the	complexity	of	a	particular	emotion	is	that	they	haven’t
yet	learned	to	think	about	their	feelings	in	a	sophisticated	way	that
recognizes	the	variety	and	richness	within	them.	As	a	result,	they
don’t	 use	 a	 full	 spectrum	 of	 emotions	 in	 their	 responses,	 and
instead	paint	their	emotional	pictures	primarily	in	black	and	white.
Ideally,	 we	 want	 our	 kids	 to	 recognize	 that	 there’s	 a	 colorful
rainbow	 of	 rich	 emotions	 within	 them,	 and	 to	 pay	 attention	 to
these	different	possibilities.
Without	 mindsight	 into	 what’s	 going	 on	 in	 their	 whole	 brain,
they’ll	be	trapped	in	black	and	white,	like	old	TV	reruns	we	watch
over	and	over	again.	When	they	have	a	full	emotional	palette,	they
are	 able	 to	 experience	 the	 vivid	 Technicolor	 that	 a	 deep	 and
vibrant	emotional	life	allows.	This	teaching	takes	place,	again,	in
your	 everyday	 interactions	 with	 your	 kids,	 and	 it	 begins	 before
they	 can	 even	 talk.	I	know	it’s	disappointing	that	you	can’t	have	the
candy.	Then	as	they	get	older	you	can	increasingly	introduce	them
to	more	subtleties	of	emotion.	I’m	sorry	your	ski	trip	got	canceled.	If
that	 happened	 to	 me,	 I’d	 be	 feeling	 all	 kinds	 of	 things:	 mad,
disappointed,	hurt,	let	down.	What	else?
Thoughts	 are	 di�erent	 from	 feelings,	 sensations,	 and	 images	 in
that	 they	 represent	 the	 more	 left-brained	 part	 of	 the	 SIFTing
process.	They	are	what	we	think	about,	what	we	tell	ourselves,	and
how	we	narrate	the	story	of	our	own	lives,	using	words.	Kids	can
learn	to	pay	attention	to	the	thoughts	running	through	their	heads,
and	understand	that	they	don’t	have	to	believe	every	one	of	them.
They	can	even	argue	with	the	ideas	that	aren’t	helpful	or	healthy—
or	even	true.	Through	this	self-talk	they	can	direct	their	attention
away	from	rim	points	that	are	limiting	them,	and	toward	those	that
lead	to	happiness	and	growth.	Mindsight	lets	them	return	to	their
hub	and	pay	attention	to	their	thoughts.	Then,	from	that	place	of
awareness,	they	can	use	self-talk	to	remind	themselves	of	other	rim
points,	of	other	thoughts	and	feelings	that	are	also	important	parts
of	themselves.	For	example,	an	eleven-year-old	girl	might	look	in
the	 mirror	 and	 say,	 “So	 stupid	 to	 get	 sunburned	 at	 camp.	 So
stupid!”	But	if	her	parents	have	taught	her	to	argue	with	her	own
negative	thoughts,	she	might	take	a	step	back	and	correct	herself:
“Come	on,	that’s	not	stupid.	It’s	normal	to	forget	things	sometimes.
Almost	all	the	kids	got	too	much	sun	today.”
By	 teaching	 our	 children	 to	 SIFT	 through	 the	 activity	 of	 their
mind,	we	can	help	them	recognize	the	di�erent	rim	points	at	work
within	them,	and	help	them	gain	more	insight	and	control	in	their
lives.	 Notice,	 too,	 how	 integrated	 the	 whole	 process	 is	 when	 it
comes	 to	 how	 the	 brain	 takes	 in	 di�erent	 stimuli.	 The	 nervous
system	 extends	 throughout	 our	 body,	 functioning	 like	 powerful
antennae	that	read	the	di�erent	physical	sensations	from	our	�ve
senses.	Then	we	draw	on	the	images	from	the	right	hemisphere	of
the	 brain,	 combining	 these	 with	 the	 feelings	 that	 arise	 from	 the
right	 brain	 and	 the	 limbic	 system.	 Then	 ultimately	 we	 link
everything	 together	 with	 the	 conscious	 thoughts	 that	 originate	 in
our	 left	 hemisphere	 and	 the	 analytical	 skills	 from	 our	 upstairs
brain.	 SIFTing	 helps	 us	 understand	 the	 important	 lesson	 that	 our
bodily	 sensations	 shape	 our	 emotion	 and	 our	 emotion	 shapes	 our
thinking,	as	well	as	the	images	in	our	mind.	The	in�uences	go	the
other	way,	too:	if	we	are	thinking	hostile	thoughts,	we	can	increase
a	feeling	of	anger	that	in	turn	can	make	our	body’s	muscles	tense
up.	All	of	the	points	on	the	rim—sensations,	images,	feelings,	and
thoughts—can	 in�uence	 the	 others,	 and	 together	 they	 create	 our
state	of	mind.
The	next	time	you	have	a	few	minutes	in	the	car	with	your	kids,
play	the	SIFT	game,	asking	questions	that	aid	the	SIFTing	process.
Here’s	an	example	of	how	you	can	begin:
YOU:				
I’ll	mention	something	about	what	the	sensations	of	my
body	are	telling	me.	I’m	hungry.	What	about	you?	What’s
your	body	saying?
YOUR
CHILD:
The	seat	belt	feels	scratchy	on	my	neck.
YOU:
Oh,	that’s	a	good	one.	I’ll	adjust	it	in	a	minute.	What	about
images?	What	pictures	are	going	through	your	mind?	I’m
remembering	that	hilarious	scene	from	your	school	play,
and	you	in	that	funny	hat.
YOUR
CHILD:
I’m	thinking	about	the	preview	we	saw	for	that	new	movie.
The	one	about	the	aliens?
YOU:
Yeah,	we’ve	got	to	see	that.	Now	feelings.	I’m	really	feeling
excited	about	Grandma	and	Grandpa	coming	tomorrow.
YOUR
CHILD:
Me,	too!
YOU:
OK,	S-I-F	…	Now	T	for	“thoughts.”	I	just	thought	about	how
we	need	milk.	We’ll	need	to	stop	before	we	get	home.
What	about	you?
YOUR
CHILD:
I’ve	been	thinking	that	Claire	should	have	to	do	more
chores	than	me,	since	she’s	older.
YOU:
(smiling)	I’m	glad	you’re	so	good	at	coming	up	with	ideas.
We’ll	have	to	give	that	one	some	more	thought.
Even	if	things	get	silly,	the	SIFT	game	is	a	good	way	to	give	your
kids	 practice	 at	 paying	 attention	 to	 their	 inner	 landscape.	 And
remember	that	just	by	talking	about	the	mind,	you	help	develop	it.
Whole-Brain	Strategy	#10:
Exercise	Mindsight:	Getting	Back	to	the	Hub
We’ve	 talked	 above	 about	 the	 power	 of	 mindsight	 and	 focused
attention.	When	kids	become	�xated	on	one	set	of	points	on	their
wheel	of	awareness,	we	need	to	help	them	shift	their	focus	so	that
they	 can	 become	 more	 integrated.	 They	 can	 then	 see	 that	 they
don’t	 have	 to	 be	 victims	 of	 the	 sensations,	 images,	 feelings,	 and
thoughts	 within	 them,	 and	decide	 how	 they	 think	 and	 feel	 about
their	experiences.
This	doesn’t	come	naturally	to	children,	but	they	can	readily	be
taught	how	to	focus	their	attention	back	to	the	hub.	We	can	give
them	 tools	 and	 strategies	 for	 calming	 themselves	 and	 integrating
their	di�erent	feelings	and	desires.	One	of	the	best	ways	parents
can	 do	 this	 is	 to	 introduce	 them	 to	 mindsight	 exercises	 that	 help
them	get	back	to	the	hub.	When	we	help	our	children	return	to	the
hub	 of	 their	 wheel,	 we	 help	 them	 become	 more	 focused	 and
centered	 so	 they	 can	 remain	 aware	 of	 the	 many	 rim	 points
affecting	their	emotions	and	state	of	mind.
Here’s	 how	 one	 mother,	 Andrea,	 helped	 her	 nine-year-old,
Nicole,	 get	 back	 to	 her	 hub	 so	 she	 could	 deal	 with	 her	 anxiety
about	 an	 upcoming	 music	 recital.	 On	 the	 morning	 of	 the	 recital,
Andrea	 realized	 that	 Nicole	 was	 understandably	 nervous	 about
playing	 her	 violin	 in	 front	 of	 her	 friends	 and	 their	 parents.	 She
knew	her	daughter’s	feelings	were	normal,	but	she	also	wanted	to
help	her	become	less	stuck	on	her	rim.	So	she	introduced	her	to	a
mindsight	exercise.	Andrea	had	Nicole	lie	�at	on	the	sofa,	and	she
sat	in	the	chair	next	to	her.	Then	she	began	to	help	her	daughter
become	more	aware	of	what	was	going	on	inside	her.	Here’s	the
gist	of	what	she	said:
OK,	Nicole,	while	you’re	lying	still,	move	your	eyes	around
the	room.	Even	without	moving	your	head,	you	can	see	the
lamp	over	on	the	table.	Now	look	over	at	your	baby	pictures.
See	 them?	 Now	 look	 at	 the	 bookcase.	 Can	 you	 see	 the	 big
Harry	Potter	book	there?	Now	look	back	at	the	lamp.
Do	you	see	how	you	have	the	power	to	focus	your	attention
all	over	this	room?	That’s	what	I	want	to	teach	you	about,	but
we’re	going	to	focus	your	attention	on	what’s	going	on	inside
your	mind	and	body.	Close	your	eyes,	and	let’s	focus	on	your
thoughts	 and	 feelings	 and	 senses.	 Let’s	 start	 with	 what	 you
hear.	 I’m	 going	 to	 be	 quiet	 for	 a	 few	 seconds,	 and	 you	 pay
attention	to	the	sounds	around	us.
What	 do	 you	 hear?	 That	 car	 going	 by?	 The	 dog	 barking
across	the	street?	Do	you	hear	your	brother	running	the	water
in	 the	 bathroom?	 You’re	 aware	 of	 those	 sounds	 simply
because	 you	 got	 still	 and	 focused	 on	 hearing	 them.	 You
listened	on	purpose.
Now	I	want	you	to	notice	your	breathing.	First,	notice	the
air	 coming	 in	 and	 out	 of	 your	 nose.…	 Now	 feel	 your	 chest
going	 up	 and	 down.…	 Now	 notice	 the	 way	 your	 stomach
moves	each	time	you	breathe	in	and	out.…
I’m	going	to	be	quiet	again	for	a	few	seconds.	During	that
time,	stay	focused	on	your	breath.	Other	thoughts	will	come
into	 your	 mind,	 and	 you’ll	 probably	 even	 think	 about	 the
recital.	 That’s	 �ne.	 When	 you	 notice	 that	 your	 mind	 is
wandering	 and	 you’re	 thinking	 about	 something	 else	 or
starting	 to	 worry,	 just	 go	 back	 to	 focusing	 on	 your	 breath.
Follow	that	wave	of	the	in-breath	and	the	out-breath.
After	a	minute	or	so	Andrea	had	Nicole	open	her	eyes	and	sit	up.
Andrea	explained	that	this	technique	is	a	powerful	way	to	calm	the
mind	and	body.	She	told	her	to	keep	this	exercise	in	her	pocket	for
when	 she	 needed	 it—for	 instance,	 just	 before	 the	 recital.	 If	 she
began	to	feel	her	heart	pounding	just	before	she	played	her	violin,
she	could	return	to	thinking	about	her	breath	coming	in	and	going
out,	even	with	her	eyes	open.
You	can	see	how	a	calming	mindsight	exercise	like	this	could	be
a	simple	but	powerful	tool	to	help	a	child	deal	with	fears	and	other
challenging	emotions.	Plus,	mindsight	exercises	lead	to	integration,
because	as	you	know,	where	we	focus	our	attention,	neurons	�re
and	become	active,	then	wire	to	other	neurons.	In	this	case,	when
Andrea	 helped	 Nicole	 focus	 on	 her	 breath,	 she	 was	 not	 only
addressing	 her	 feelings	 of	 anxiety.	 She	 was	 also	 helping	 her
daughter	 return	 to	 her	 hub,	 so	 she	 could	 notice	 other	 parts	 of
herself	 and	 even	 physical	 sensations	 that	 she	 could	 then
intentionally	 change.	 So	 her	 neurons	 associated	 with	 mindfully
focusing	 on	 her	 breath	 became	 wired	 to	 her	 neurons	 related	 to
feelings	of	calm	and	well-being.	She	moved	into	a	completely	new
state	of	mind	and	was	able	to	get	back	to	her	hub.
While	 this	 example	 focuses	 on	 an	 older,	 school-age	 child,
younger	kids	can	bene�t	from	mindsight	exercises	as	well.	Even	as
young	 as	 four	 or	 �ve,	 kids	 can	 learn	 to	 focus	 on	 their	 breath.	 A
good	technique	is	to	have	them	lie	down	and	place	a	toy—like	a
boat—on	their	stomach.	Ask	them	to	focus	on	the	boat,	watching	it
rise	and	fall	as	it	rides	the	waves	of	breath.
But	 we’re	 not	 suggesting	 that	 mindsight	 exercises	 require	 a
person	to	lie	down	and	enter	a	meditative	state.	One	of	the	best
tools	you	give	your	kids	for	when	they	feel	anxious	or	afraid,	or
even	when	they’re	having	trouble	falling	asleep,	is	to	teach	them	to
visualize	a	place	where	they	feel	calm	and	peaceful:	�oating	on	a
raft	 in	 a	 pool,	 sitting	 next	 to	 a	 river	 they	 remember	 from	 a
camping	 trip,	 or	 swinging	 in	 a	 hammock	 at	 their	 grandparents’
house.
Mindsight	exercises	lead	to	survival	which	can	help	kids	manage
their	 anxieties,	 frustrations,	 and,	 for	 older	 children,	 even	 intense
anger.	 But	 these	 strategies	 lead	 to	thriving	 as	 well.	 After	 Andrea
introduced	 Nicole	 to	 the	 mindsight	 exercise	 before	 her	 recital
(where	 she	 ultimately	 relaxed	 and	 played	 beautifully),	 they
returned	 to	 similar	 exercises	 from	 time	 to	 time,	 with	 Andrea
leading	Nicole	through	certain	visualizations	like	the	one	above.	As
she	 grew	 older	 and	 kept	 practicing,	 Nicole	 began	 to	 understand
more	about	the	hub	of	her	wheel,	so	she	could	get	back	to	it	more
easily	 and	 quickly.	 She	 learned	 to	 focus	 more	 precisely	 and
speci�cally	on	the	parts	of	herself	that	she	wanted	to	develop	and
grow.
Watch	for	ways	to	help	your	children	learn	to	be	still	and	calm	at
times	and	�nd	the	deep-ocean	peacefulness	within	their	hub.	From
there	 they’ll	 be	 better	 able	 to	 survive	 the	 storms	 brewing	 within
them	from	moment	to	moment,	and	they’ll	have	a	better	chance	of
thriving—emotionally,	 psychologically,	 socially—as	 they	 grow
toward	adulthood.
Whole-Brain	Kids:
Teach	Your	Kids	About	Integrating	the	Many	Parts	of
Themselves
We’ve	 already	 given	 you	 several	 examples	 of	 how	 other	 parents
have	 introduced	 their	 children	 to	 mindsight	 and	 the	 power	 of
focused	attention.	Here	is	something	you	can	read	with	your	own
child	to	teach	the	concept.
Integrating	 Ourselves:	 Looking	 at	 Our	 Own	 Wheel	 of
Awareness
There	 are	 many	 ways	 parents	 can	 bene�t	 from	 an
understanding	of	mindsight	and	their	own	wheel	of	awareness.
Let’s	 take	 a	 moment	 so	 you	 can	 see,	 and	 experience,	 what
we’re	talking	about.
From	 your	 hub,	 SIFT	 through	 your	 own	 mind.	 What	 rim
points	have	your	attention	right	now?	Maybe	some	of	these?
I’m	so	tired.	I	wish	I	had	just	one	more	hour	of	sleep.
I’m	also	irritated	that	my	son’s	Yankees	cap	is	there	on
the	floor.	Now	when	he	gets	home	I’ll	have	to	ride	him
about	that,	and	about	his	homework.
Dinner	with	the	Coopers	will	be	fun	tonight,	but	I	kind	of
wish	we	weren’t	going.
I’m	tired.
I	wish	I	did	more	for	myself.	At	least	I’m	giving	myself
the	pleasure	of	reading	a	book	these	days.
Did	I	mention	I’m	tired?
All	 of	 these	 sensations,	 images,	 feelings,	 and	 thoughts	 are
the	rim	points	on	your	wheel	of	awareness,	and	together	they
determine	your	state	of	mind.
Now	 let’s	 see	 what	 happens	 when	 you	 intentionally	 direct
your	 attention	 to	 other	 rim	 points.	 Slow	 down	 for	 a	 few
seconds,	 get	 quiet	 within	 yourself,	 and	 ask	 yourself	 these
questions:
What’s	something	funny	or	adorable	my	child	said	or	did
lately?
Even	though	it’s	monstrously	difficult	at	times,	do	I
genuinely	love	and	appreciate	getting	to	be	a	parent?
How	would	I	feel	if	I	didn’t	get	to	be	a	parent?
What’s	my	child’s	favorite	T-shirt	right	now?	Can	I
remember	her	first	pair	of	shoes?
Can	I	picture	how	my	child	might	look	at	eighteen,	bags
packed	and	leaving	for	college?
Feeling	different?	Has	your	state	of	mind	changed?
Mindsight	 did	 that.	 From	 your	 hub	 you	 noticed	 the	 rim
points	 on	 your	 own	 wheel	 of	 awareness,	 and	 you	 became
aware	of	what	you	were	experiencing.	Then	you	shifted	your
focus,	 directing	 your	 attention	 to	 other	 rim	 points,	 and	 as	 a
result,	your	entire	state	of	mind	changed.	This	is	the	power	of
your	 mind,	 and	 this	 is	 how	 it	 can	 literally	 and	 fundamentally
transform	 the	 way	 you	 feel	 about	 and	 interact	 with	 your	 kids.
Without	 mindsight,	 you	 can	 get	 stuck	 on	 your	 rim,	 feeling
primarily	frustrated	or	angry	or	resentful.	The	joy	of	parenting
is	 gone	 in	that	 moment.	 But	 by	 returning	 to	 your	 hub	 and
shifting	 your	 focus,	 you	 can	 begin	 to	 experience	 joy	 and
gratitude	about	getting	to	parent	your	children—just	by	paying
attention	 and	deciding	 to	 direct	 your	 attention	 to	 new	 rim
points.
Mindsight	 can	 also	 be	 immensely	 practical.	 For	 example,
think	 for	 a	 moment	 right	 now	 about	 the	 last	 time	 you	 got
angry	 with	 one	 of	 your	 children.	 Really	 angry,	 where	 you
could’ve	lost	control.	Remember	what	he	did,	and	how	furious
you	felt.	At	times	like	these,	the	anger	you	feel	burns	bright
and	 �ery	 on	 the	 rim	 of	 your	 wheel.	 In	 fact,	 it	 burns	 so
intensely	that	it	far	outshines	other	rim	points	that	represent
the	 feelings	 and	 knowledge	 you	 have	 about	 your	 kids:	 your
understanding	that	your	four-year-old	is	acting	like	a	normal
four-year-old;	your	memory	of	laughing	hysterically	together,
just	 a	 few	 minutes	 earlier,	 as	 you	 played	 cards;	 the	 promise
you	made	that	you	were	going	to	stop	grabbing	your	children’s
arms	 when	 you’re	 angry;	 your	 desire	 to	 model	 appropriate
expressions	of	anger.
This	is	how	we	become	swept	up	by	the	rim	when	we’re	not
integrated	 via	 the	 hub.	 The	 downstairs	 brain	 takes	 over	 any
integrative	 functioning	 of	 the	 upstairs	 area,	 and	 other	 rim
points	are	eclipsed	by	the	glare	of	this	single	point	of	your	all-
consuming	anger.	Remember	“flipping	your	lid”?
What	 do	 you	 need	 to	 do	 in	 a	 moment	 like	 this?	 Yep,	 you
guessed	it:	integrate.	Use	your	mindsight.	By	focusing	on	your
breath,	you	can	at	least	begin	to	get	back	to	the	hub	of	your
mind.	This	is	the	required	step	that	allows	us	to	pull	back	from
being	consumed	by	a	single	angry	point	on	the	rim—or	a	few
of	them.	Once	in	the	hub,	it	becomes	possible	to	take	in	the
wider	 perspective	 that	 there	 are	 other	 rim	 points	 to	 keep	 in
mind.	 You	 can	 get	 some	 water,	 take	 a	 break	 and	 stretch,	 or
give	yourself	a	moment	to	collect	yourself.	Then,	once	you’ve
brought	 your	 attention	 back	 to	 your	 hub,	 you’ll	 be	 free	 to
choose	 how	 you	 want	 to	 respond	 to	 your	 child	 and	 if
necessary	repair	any	breach	in	your	relationship.
This	doesn’t	mean	ignoring	bad	behavior.	Not	at	all.	In	fact,
one	of	the	rim	points	you’ll	integrate	with	the	others	is	your
belief	 in	 setting	 clear	 and	 consistent	 boundaries.	 There	 are
many	 perspectives	 you	 can	 embrace,	 from	 desires	 for	 your
child	to	act	in	a	di�erent	way	to	feelings	of	concern	over	how
you’ve	acted	in	response.	When	you	link	all	these	different	rim
points	together—when	you’ve	used	the	hub	to	integrate	your
mind	 at	 that	 moment—you’ll	 feel	 a	 readiness	 to	 continue
attuned,	 sensitive	 parenting.	 Then,	 with	 your	 whole	 brain
working	 together,	 you	 can	 connect	 with	 your	 child	 because
you	are	connected	within	yourself.	You’ll	have	a	much	better
chance	of	responding	the	way	you	want	to,	with	mindsight	and
the	 wholeness	 of	 who	 you	 are,	 instead	 of	 an	 immediate
reaction	spurred	on	by	a	�ery	point	on	the	rim	of	your	wheel.
To	do	your	own	wheel	practice,	go	to	drdansiegel.com.
CHAPTER	6
The	Me-We	Connection
Integrating	Self	and	Other
Ron	 and	 Sandy	 were	 fed	 up.	 Their	 seven-year-old,	 Colin,	 was	 a
good	 kid.	 He	 didn’t	 cause	 trouble	 at	 school,	 his	 friends	 and	 their
parents	liked	him,	and	he	generally	did	what	he	was	supposed	to
do.	 But	 he	 was,	 in	 his	 parents’	 words,	 “totally	 and	 incurably
sel�sh.”	He	always	grabbed	the	last	slice	of	pizza,	even	if	he	still
had	 some	 on	 his	 plate.	 He	 begged	 for	 a	 puppy,	 then	 showed	 no
interest	 in	 even	 playing	 with	 it,	 much	 less	 using	 the	 pooper
scooper.	Even	after	growing	out	of	his	toys,	he	still	refused	to	let
his	younger	brother	play	with	them.
Ron	 and	 Sandy	 knew	 that	 a	 certain	 amount	 of	 egocentrism	 in
children	 is	 normal.	 And	 they	 didn’t	 want	 to	 change	 Colin’s
personality—they	wanted	to	love	him	for	who	he	was.	But	at	times
it	 drove	 them	 crazy	 that	 he	 often	 seemed	 incapable	 of	 thinking
about	other	people.	When	it	came	to	relational	skills	like	empathy,
kindness,	 and	 consideration,	 Colin	 just	 seemed	 to	 be	 missing	 the
development	of	that	circuit.
The	 breaking	 point	 came	 one	 day	 after	 school	 when	 Colin
disappeared	 into	 the	 bedroom	 he	 shared	 with	 his	 �ve-year-old
brother,	Logan.	Ron	was	in	the	kitchen	when	he	heard	yelling	from
the	boys’	room.	He	went	to	investigate	and	discovered	a	distraught
Logan,	 furious	 with	 his	 big	 brother	 and	 crying	 over	 a	 pile	 of
artwork	and	trophies.	Colin	had	decided	to	“redecorate”	the	room.
He	had	taken	down	all	of	Logan’s	watercolor	paintings	and	marker
drawings	 hanging	 on	 the	 walls	 and	 replaced	 them	 with	 his	 own
posters	 and	 baseball	 cards,	 which	 he’d	 taped	 in	 rows	 across	 the
largest	wall	in	the	room.	In	addition,	he	had	removed	Logan’s	two
soccer	trophies	from	the	shelf	and	set	up	his	own	bobblehead	dolls
in	their	place.	Colin	had	piled	all	of	Logan’s	belongings	in	a	corner
of	the	room,	he	explained,	“so	they	wouldn’t	be	in	the	way.”
When	Sandy	got	home	she	and	Ron	talked	about	their	frustration
with	 their	 older	 son.	 They	 sincerely	 believed	 that	 there	 was	 no
malice	in	Colin’s	actions.	In	fact,	that	was	almost	the	problem:	he
never	 even	considered	 Logan’s	 feelings	 enough	 to	 intend	 to	 hurt
him.	He	redecorated	the	room	for	the	same	reason	he	always	took
the	last	slice	of	pizza:	he	just	didn’t	think	about	others.
This	issue	is	a	common	one	for	parents.	We	want	our	kids	to	be
caring	and	considerate	so	they	can	enjoy	meaningful	relationships.
Sometimes	 we	 fear	 that	 because	 they’re	 not	 as	 kind	 (or
compassionate	 or	 grateful	 or	 generous)	 as	 we	 want	 them	 to	 be,
they	never	will	be.	Of	course,	we	can’t	expect	a	seven-year-old	to
behave	as	if	he	were	an	enlightened	adult.	Sure,	we	want	our	kids
to	 become	 men	 and	 women	 who	 are	 strong	 and	 forgiving	 and
respectful	and	loving,	but	that’s	a	bit	much	to	expect	of	someone
who’s	just	recently	learned	to	tie	his	shoes.
However,	while	it’s	important	to	trust	the	process	and	know	that
much	of	what	we	want	for	our	kids	will	emerge	only	over	time,	we
can	prepare	them	and	steer	them	toward	becoming	children,	teens,
and	 ultimately	 adults	 who	 are	 fully	 capable	 of	 participating	 in
relationships	 and	 considering	 the	 feelings	 of	 others.	 Some	 people
simply	have	fewer	neural	connections	in	their	circuitry	in	charge	of
empathy	and	relationships.	Just	like	kids	who	have	trouble	reading
need	 to	 practice	 and	 grow	 those	 connections	 in	 their	 brain,	 kids
who	 have	 di�culty	 relating	 to	 others	 need	 to	 have	 those
connections	 encouraged	 and	 cultivated.	 And	 just	 as	 a	 learning
disability	is	a	sign	of	a	mental	challenge,	so	is	an	inability	to	feel
someone	 else’s	 pain.	 It’s	 a	 developmental	 issue,	 not	 necessarily	a
character	 problem.	 Even	 children	 who	 don’t	 seem	 predisposed	 to
connection	 and	 compassion	 can	learn	 what	 it	 means	 to	 be	 in
relationship,	and	to	fulfill	the	responsibilities	that	come	with	it.
That’s	what	this	chapter	is	about.	Most	of	the	information	we’ve
provided	in	earlier	chapters	focuses	on	how	to	help	develop	your
child’s	whole	brain	in	order	to	develop	a	strong	and	resilient	sense
of	“me.”	But	like	Ron	and	Sandy,	you	know	that	kids	need	just	as
much	help	understanding	what	it	means	to	become	part	of	a	“we,”
so	 that	 they	 can	 be	 integrated	 with	 others.	 In	 fact,	 in	 our	 ever-
changing	modern	society,	learning	to	move	from	“me”	to	“we”	may
be	essential	for	how	our	children	will	be	able	to	adapt	in	our	future
world.
Helping	children	become	a	participating	member	of	a	“we”	while
not	losing	touch	with	their	individual	“me”	is	a	tall	order	for	any
parent.	But	happiness	and	ful�llment	result	from	being	connected
to	others	while	still	maintaining	a	unique	identity.	That’s	also	the
essence	 of	 mindsight,	 which	 you’ll	 remember	 is	 all	 about	 seeing
your	 own	 mind,	 as	 well	 as	 the	 mind	 of	 another.	 It’s	 about
developing	 ful�lling	 relationships	 while	 maintaining	 a	 healthy
sense	of	self.
In	 the	 previous	 chapter	 we	 discussed	 the	 �rst	 aspect	 of
mindsight,	 seeing	 and	 understanding	 our	 own	 mind.	 We	 talked
about	 helping	 kids	 become	 aware	 of	 and	 integrate	 the	 many
di�erent	parts	of	themselves	via	the	wheel	of	awareness.	The	key
concept	in	this	aspect	of	mindsight	is	personal	insight.
Now	 we	 want	 to	 turn	 our	 attention	 to	 the	 second	 aspect	 of
mindsight,	developing	the	ability	to	see	and	connect	with	the	minds
of	others.	This	connection	depends	on	empathy,	on	recognizing	the
feelings,	desires,	and	perspectives	of	another.	Ron	and	Sandy’s	son
seemed	 to	 need	 empathy	 skills.	 In	 addition	 to	 developing	 and
integrating	 his	 whole	 brain	 and	 the	 di�erent	 parts	 of	 himself,	 he
needed	 to	 be	 given	 lots	 of	 practice	 at	 seeing	 things	 from	 other
people’s	 perspectives,	 seeing	 other	 people’s	 minds.	 He	 needed	 to
develop	this	second	aspect	of	mindsight.
Insight	+	Empathy	=	Mindsight
Insight	and	empathy.	If	we	can	encourage	these	attributes	in	our
kids,	 we	 will	 give	 them	 the	 gift	 of	 mindsight,	 o�ering	 them
awareness	 about	 themselves,	 and	 connection	 with	 those	 around
them.	But	how	do	we	do	that?	How	do	we	encourage	our	kids	to
connect	with	family,	friends,	and	the	world	while	cultivating	and
maintaining	 their	 own	 individual	 sense	 of	 self?	 How	 do	 we	 help
them	 learn	 to	 share?	 To	 get	 along	 with	 siblings?	 To	 negotiate
playground	 politics?	 To	 communicate	 well	 and	 consider	 others’
feelings?	The	answers	to	all	these	questions	emerge	from	the	me-
we	connection,	which	we	can	understand	by	�rst	looking	at	how
the	brain	participates	in	the	creation	of	relationships.
THE	SOCIAL	BRAIN:	WIRED	FOR	“WE”
What	do	you	picture	when	you	think	about	the	brain?	Maybe	you
recall	 an	 image	 from	 high	 school	 biology	 class:	 that	 weird	 organ
�oating	 in	 the	 jar,	 or	 a	 picture	 of	 it	 in	 a	 textbook.	 The	 problem
with	 this	 “single	 skull”	 perspective—where	 we	 consider	 each
individual	brain	as	a	lone	organ	isolated	in	a	single	skull—is	that	it
neglects	the	truth	that	scientists	have	come	to	understand	over	the
last	 few	 decades:	 that	 the	 brain	 is	 a	 social	 organ,	 made	 to	 be	 in
relationship.	 It’s	 hardwired	 to	 take	 in	 signals	 from	 the	 social
environment,	 which	 in	 turn	 in�uence	 a	 person’s	 inner	 world.	 In
other	 words,	 what	 happens	between	brains	 has	 a	 great	 deal	 to	 do
with	
what	
happens	within	 each	 individual	 brain.	 Self	 and
community	 are	 fundamentally	 interrelated,	 since	 every	 brain	 is
continually	constructed	by	its	interactions	with	others.	Even	more,
studies	of	happiness	and	wisdom	reveal	that	a	key	factor	in	well-
being	 is	 devoting	 one’s	 attention	 and	 passions	 to	 the	 bene�t	 of
others	instead	of	just	focusing	on	the	individual,	separate	concerns
of	 a	 private	 self.	 The	 “me”	 discovers	 meaning	 and	 happiness	 by
joining	and	belonging	to	a	“we.”
To	 put	 it	 di�erently,	 the	 brain	 is	 set	 up	 for	interpersonal
integration.	 Just	 as	 its	 many	 di�erent	 parts	 are	 made	 to	 work
together,	each	individual	brain	is	made	to	relate	with	the	brain	of
each	person	we	interact	with.	Interpersonal	integration	means	that
we	 honor	 and	 nurture	 our	 di�erences	 while	 cultivating	 our
connections	 with	one	another.	So	while	we	want	to	help	our	kids
integrate	 their	 left	 and	 right	 brain,	 their	 upstairs	 and	 downstairs
brain,	their	implicit	and	explicit	memories,	and	so	on,	we	also	need
to	help	them	understand	the	extent	to	which	they	are	connected	to
their	 family,	 friends,	 classmates,	 and	 other	 people	 in	 their
communities.	By	understanding	basic	facets	of	the	relational	brain,
we	can	help	our	kids	develop	the	mindsight	that	will	allow	them	to
enjoy	deeper	and	more	meaningful	relationships.
MIRROR	NEURONS:	THE	REFLECTORS	IN	THE	MIND
Do	you	ever	get	thirsty	when	you	see	someone	take	a	drink?	Or
yawn	 when	 someone	 else	 does?	 These	 familiar	 responses	 can	 be
understood	 in	 light	 of	 one	 of	 the	 most	 fascinating	 recent
discoveries	 about	 the	 brain:	 mirror	 neurons.	 Here’s	 how	 the
discovery	took	place.
In	 the	 early	 1990s,	 a	 group	 of	 Italian	 neuroscientists	 were
studying	 the	 brain	 of	 a	 macaque	 monkey.	 They	 had	 implanted
electrodes	 to	 monitor	 individual	 neurons,	 and	 when	 the	 monkey
ate	 a	 peanut,	 a	 certain	 electrode	 �red.	 No	 surprise	 there—that’s
what	the	researchers	expected.	But	then	a	scientist’s	snack	changed
the	 course	 of	 our	 insight	 into	 the	 mind.	 One	 of	 the	 researchers
picked	up	a	peanut	and	ate	it	as	the	monkey	watched.	In	response,
the	 monkey’s	 motor	 neuron	 �red—the	 same	 one	 that	 had	 �red
when	 he	 had	 actually	 eaten	 the	 peanut	 himself!	 The	 researchers
discovered	 that	 the	 monkey’s	 brain	 was	 in�uenced	 and	 became
active	just	by	watching	the	actions	of	another.	Whether	the	monkey
witnessed	an	action	or	performed	that	same	behavior	himself,	the
same	set	of	neurons	became	activated.
Scientists	 immediately	 began	 scrambling	 to	 identify	 these
“mirror	 neurons”	 in	 humans.	 And	 while	 there	 are	 far	 more
questions	than	answers	about	exactly	what	they	are	and	how	they
work,	 we	 are	 actively	 learning	 more	 and	 more	 about	 the	 mirror
neuron	 system.	 These	 neurons	 may	 be	 the	 root	 of	 empathy,	 and
therefore	contribute	to	mindsight,	in	the	human	brain.
The	 key	 is	 that	 mirror	 neurons	 respond	 only	 to	 an	 act	 with
intention,	where	there’s	some	predictability	or	purpose	that	can	be
perceived.	For	example,	if	someone	simply	waves	her	hand	in	the
air	 randomly,	 your	 mirror	 neurons	 won’t	 respond.	 But	 if	 that
person	 carries	 out	 an	 act	 you	 can	 predict	 from	 experience,	 like
taking	 a	 drink	 from	 a	 cup	 of	 water,	 your	 mirror	 neurons	 will
“�gure	out”	what’s	intended	before	the	person	does	it.	So	when	she
lifts	 up	 her	 hand	 with	 a	 cup	 in	 it,	 you	 can	 predict	 at	 a	 synaptic
level	that	she	intends	to	drink	from	it.	Not	only	that,	the	mirror
neurons	in	your	own	upstairs	brain	will	get	you	ready	to	drink	as
well.	We	see	an	act,	we	understand	the	purpose	of	the	act,	and	we
ready	ourselves	to	mirror	it.
At	 the	 simplest	 level,	 that’s	 why	 we	 get	 thirsty	 when	 others
drink,	and	why	we	yawn	when	others	yawn.	It	may	be	why	even	a
newborn	infant,	just	a	few	hours	old,	can	mimic	his	parents	when
he	 sticks	 out	 his	 tongue.	 Mirror	 neurons	 may	 also	 explain	 why
younger	siblings	are	sometimes	better	at	sports.	Before	they	ever
join	 their	 own	 team,	 their	 mirror	 neurons	 have	 �red	 each	 of	 the
hundreds	 of	 times	 they’ve	 watched	 their	 older	 siblings	 hit,	 kick,
and	throw	a	ball.	At	the	most	complex	level,	mirror	neurons	help
us	understand	the	nature	of	culture	and	how	our	shared	behaviors
bind	us	together,	child	to	parent,	friend	to	friend,	and	eventually
spouse	to	spouse.
Now	let’s	take	another	step.	Based	on	what	we	see	(as	well	as
hear,	 smell,	 touch,	 and	 taste)	 in	 the	 world	 around	 us,	 we	 can
mirror	not	only	the	behavioral	intentions	of	others,	but	also	their
emotional	states.	In	other	words,	mirror	neurons	may	allow	us	not
only	 to	 imitate	 others’	 behaviors,	 but	 actually	 to	 resonate	 with
their	feelings.	We	sense	not	only	what	action	is	coming	next,	but
also	the	emotion	that	underlies	the	behavior.	For	this	reason,	we
could	also	call	these	special	neural	cells	“sponge	neurons”	in	that
we	soak	up	like	a	sponge	what	we	see	in	the	behaviors,	intentions,
and	 emotions	 of	 someone	 else.	 We	 don’t	 just	 “mirror	 back”	 to
someone	else,	but	we	“sponge	in”	their	internal	states.
Notice	what	happens	when	you’re	at	a	party	with	friends.	If	you
approach	 a	 group	 that’s	 laughing,	 you’ll	 probably	 �nd	 yourself
smiling	 or	 chuckling	 even	 before	 you’ve	 heard	 the	 joke.	 Or	 have
you	 noticed	 that	 when	 you’re	 nervous	 or	 stressed	 out,	 your	 kids
will	 often	 be	 that	 way,	 too?	 Scientists	 call	 this	 “emotional
contagion.”	The	internal	states	of	others—from	joy	and	playfulness
to	 sadness	 and	 fear—directly	 a�ect	 our	 own	 state	 of	 mind.	 We
soak	other	people	into	our	own	inner	world.
You	 can	 see,	 then,	 why	 neuroscientists	 call	 the	 brain	 a	 social
organ.	 It’s	 absolutely	 built	 for	 mindsight.	 We	 are	 biologically
equipped	to	be	in	relationships,	to	understand	where	other	people
are	coming	from,	and	to	in�uence	one	another.	As	we’ve	explained
throughout	 the	 book,	 the	 brain	 is	 actually	 reshaped	 by	 our
experiences.	That	means	that	every	discussion,	argument,	joke,	or
hug	we	share	with	someone	else	literally	alters	our	brain	and	that
of	 the	 other	 person.	 After	 a	 powerful	 conversation	 or	 time	 spent
with	 an	 important	 person	 in	 our	 life,	 we	 have	 a	 di�erent	 brain.
Since	 none	 of	 us	 is	 working	 from	 a	 single-skull	 mind,	 our	 whole
mental	 life	 results	 from	 our	 inner	 neural	 world	 and	 the	 external
signals	 we	 receive	 from	 others.	 Each	 of	 us	 is	 meant	 to	 join	 our
individual	“me”	with	others	to	become	a	part	of	“we.”
LAYING	THE	GROUNDWORK	FOR	CONNECTION:
CREATING	POSITIVE	MENTAL	MODELS
What	 does	 all	 this	 mean	 for	 our	 children?	 The	 kinds	 of
relationships	they	experience	will	lay	the	groundwork	for	how	they
relate	to	others	for	the	rest	of	their	lives.	In	other	words,	how	well
they’ll	be	able	to	use	their	mindsight	to	participate	in	a	“we”	and
join	 with	 others	 down	 the	 road	 is	 based	 on	 the	 quality	 of	 their
attachment	 relationships	 with	 their	 caregivers—including	 parents
and	grandparents,	but	also	signi�cant	babysitters,	teachers,	peers,
and	other	influential	people	in	their	lives.
When	kids	spend	time	with	the	most	important	people	in	their
life,	 they	 develop	 important	 relational	 skills	 like	 communicating
and	 listening	 well,	 interpreting	 facial	 expressions,	 understanding
nonverbal	 communication,	 sharing,	 and	 sacri�cing.	 But	 also,	 in
relationships,	children	develop	models	about	how	they	themselves
�t	into	the	world	around	them,	and	how	relationships	work.	They
learn	 whether	 they	 can	 trust	 others	 to	 see	 and	 respond	 to	 their
needs,	 and	 whether	 they	 feel	 connected	 and	 protected	 enough	 to
step	out	and	take	risks.	In	short,	they	learn	whether	relationships
will	leave	them	feeling	alone	and	unseen;	anxious	and	confused;	or
felt,	understood,	and	securely	cared	for.
Think	of	a	newborn.	A	baby	is	born	ready	to	connect,	ready	to
link	what	she	sees	in	others	with	what	she	does	and	with	what	she
feels	 inside.	 But	 what	 if	 those	 others	 are	 only	 rarely	 attuned	 to
what	 she	 needs?	 What	 if,	 more	 often	 than	 not,	 her	 parents	 are
unavailable	 and	 rejecting?	 Then	 confusion	 and	 frustration	 will
initially	permeate	the	child’s	mind.	Without	intimate	moments	of
consistent	 connection	 with	 her	 caregivers,	 she	 may	 grow	 up
without	mindsight,	without	an	understanding	of	the	importance	of
joining	 with	 someone	 else.	 We	 learn	 early	 in	 life	 to	 use	 our
connections	 with	 reliable	 others	 to	 soothe	 our	 internal	 distress.
This	is	the	basis	of	secure	attachment.	But	if	we	aren’t	given	such
nurturing,	 our	 brain	 will	 need	 to	 adapt	 and	 do	 the	 best	 it	 can.
Children	 can	 learn	 to	 “go	 it	 alone”	 in	 an	 e�ort	 to	 soothe
themselves	as	best	they	can.	The	relational,	emotional	circuitry	of
this	 child’s	 brain,	 which	 needs	 closeness	 and	 connection	 that	 are
not	being	o�ered	to	her,	may	completely	shut	down	as	a	way	of
adapting.	This	is	how	the	social	brain	shuts	down	its	innate	drive
for	connection	just	to	survive.	However,	if	her	parents	can	learn	to
show	 her	 consistent,	 predictable	 love	 and	 attunement,	 she	 will
develop	mindsight	and	live	up	to	the	relational	potential	her	brain
has	been	wired	for.
It’s	not	just	parents	who	create	the	strategies	of	adaptation—or
mental	models—for	how	children	view	relationships.	Think	about
what	 your	 children	 are	 learning	 from	 their	 relationships	 with
various	caregivers,	like	the	coach	who	emphasizes	the	importance
of	 working	 together	 and	 making	 sacri�ces	 for	 teammates.	 Or	 the
aunt	 who	 is	 hypercritical,	 who	 teaches	 that	 a	 central	 part	 of	 a
relationship	 involves	 disapproval	 and	 �nding	 fault.	 Or	 the
classmate	 who	 views	 all	 relationships	 through	 the	 lens	 of
competition,	 seeing	 everyone	 as	 a	 rival	 or	 adversary.	 Or	 the
teacher	 who	 emphasizes	 kindness	 and	 mutual	 respect	 and	 models
compassion	in	her	interactions	with	the	children	in	her	class.
All	of	these	di�erent	relational	experiences	wire	a	child’s	brain
for	what	a	“we”	feels	like.	Remember	that	the	brain	uses	repeated
experiences	 or	 associations	 to	 predict	 what	 to	 expect.	 When
relationships	are	cold	and	people	are	essentially	distant,	critical,	or
competitive,	that	in�uences	what	the	child	expects	relationships	to
feel	like.	On	the	other	hand,	if	the	child	experiences	relationships
full	of	nurturing	warmth,	connection,	and	protection,	then	that	will
become	 the	 model	 for	 future	 relationships—with	 friends,	 with
other	 members	 of	 various	 communities,	 and	 eventually	 with
romantic	partners	and	their	own	children.
It’s	 really	 not	 an	 exaggeration	 to	 say	 that	 the	 kind	 of
relationships	you	provide	for	your	children	will	a�ect	generations
to	come.	We	can	impact	the	future	of	the	world	by	caring	well	for
our	children	and	by	being	intentional	in	giving	them	the	kinds	of
relationships	 that	 we	 value	 and	 that	 we	 want	 them	 to	 see	 as
normal.
PREPARING	FOR	“WE”:	OFFERING	EXPERIENCES	THAT	LEAD	TO	CONNECTION
In	addition	to	modeling	good	relationships	for	our	kids,	we	need	to
prepare	them	to	join	with	others,	so	they’ll	be	capable	of	becoming
a	part	of	a	“we.”	After	all,	just	because	the	mind	is	equipped	and
designed	to	connect	with	others	doesn’t	mean	that	a	child	is	born
with	relationship	skills.	Being	born	with	muscles	doesn’t	make	you
an	athlete:	you	need	to	learn	and	practice	speci�c	skills.	Likewise,
children	don’t	emerge	from	the	womb	wanting	to	share	their	toys.
Nor	are	their	�rst	words	“I’ll	sacri�ce	what	I	want	so	we	can	strike
a	 mutually	 bene�cial	 compromise.”	 On	 the	 contrary,	 the	 phrases
that	dominate	the	vocabulary	of	toddlers—“mine,”	“me,”	and	even
“no”—emphasize	 their	 lack	 of	 understanding	 of	 what	 it	 means	 to
be	 a	 part	 of	 a	 “we.”	 So	 they	 have	 to	learn	 mindsight	 skills	 like
sharing,	forgiving,	sacrifice,	and	listening.
Colin,	Ron	and	Sandy’s	son	who	seems	so	egocentric,	is	for	the
most	part	a	very	normal	kid.	He	just	hasn’t	quite	mastered	many	of
the	 mindsight	 skills	 that	 are	 necessary	 for	 participating	 as	 a
contributing	member	of	a	family.	His	parents’	expectation	was	that
by	the	time	he	was	seven,	he’d	be	more	integrated	into	the	family
and	willing	to	be	a	part	of	a	“we.”	While	he’s	steadily	improving
his	relational	intelligence,	he	needs	practice	to	keep	moving	in	that
direction.
The	 same	 goes	 for	 a	 shy	 child.	 Lisa,	 a	 mom	 we	 know,	 has
pictures	of	one	of	her	sons	at	his	friend’s	fourth-birthday	party.	All
of	the	children	are	gathered	in	a	tight	circle	around	a	young	woman
dressed	 like	 Dora	 the	 Explorer.	 All,	 that	 is,	 except	 for	 Lisa’s	 son
Ian,	who	insisted	on	standing	six	feet	away	from	the	circle	of	not-
so-shy	kids.	It	was	the	same	at	his	toddler	music	class.	While	the
other	 children	 sang	 and	 danced	 and	 itsy-bitsy-spidered	 their	 little
hands	o�,	Ian	sat	in	his	mom’s	lap	and	refused	to	do	anything	more
than	timidly	observe.
In	 those	 years,	 Lisa	 and	 her	 husband	 had	 to	 walk	 the	 line
between	encouraging	new	relationships	and	pushing	too	hard.	But
by	 giving	 their	 son	 repeated	 opportunities	 to	 interact	 with	 other
children	 and	 to	 �gure	 out	 how	 to	 make	 friends,	 all	 while
supporting	 and	 comforting	 him	 when	 he	 was	 nervous	 or	 afraid,
they	 helped	 their	 young	 introvert	 develop	 the	 social	 skills	 he
needed.	And	while	these	days	Ian	is	still	not	quick	to	dive	head�rst
into	new	social	situations,	he	is	very	comfortable	with	himself,	and
even	outgoing	at	times.	He	looks	people	in	the	eye	when	he	talks
to	 them,	 raises	 his	 hand	 in	 class,	 and	 is	 even	 frequently	 the
ringleader	 in	 the	 dugout	 for	 a	 (very	 enthusiastic)	 rendition	 of
“Take	Me	Out	to	the	Ball	Game.”
Researchers	who	study	human	personality	tell	us	that	shyness	is
to	 a	 large	 extent	 genetic.	 It’s	 actually	 a	 part	 of	 a	 person’s	 core
makeup	 present	 at	 birth.	 However,	 as	 in	 the	 case	 of	 Ian,	 that
doesn’t	mean	that	shyness	isn’t	changeable	to	a	signi�cant	degree.
In	 fact,	 the	 way	 parents	 handle	 their	 child’s	 shyness	 has	 a	 big
impact	 on	 how	 the	 child	 deals	 with	 that	 aspect	 of	 his	 or	 her
personality,	as	well	as	how	shy	the	child	is	later	on.
The	 point	 is	 that	 parenting	 matters,	 even	 to	 the	 extent	 of
in�uencing	 our	 inborn	 and	 genetically	 shaped	 temperament.	 We
can	 help	 prepare	 our	 kids	 to	 join	 with	 others	 and	 experience
meaningful	
relationships	
by	
o�ering	
encouragement	
and
opportunities	that	help	them	develop	those	mindsight	skills.	We’ll
talk	in	a	minute	about	some	speci�c	ways	to	do	that.	But	�rst	let’s
explain	 what	 we	 mean	 by	 helping	 kids	 be	 receptive	 to	 being	 in
relationships.
CULTIVATING	A	“YES”	STATE	OF	MIND:	HELPING	KIDS	BE	RECEPTIVE	TO	RELATIONSHIPS
If	we	want	to	prepare	kids	to	participate	as	healthy	individuals	in	a
relationship,	we	need	to	create	within	them	an	open,	receptive	state,
instead	 of	 a	closed,	 reactive	 one.	 To	 illustrate,	 here’s	 an	 exercise
Dan	 uses	 with	 many	 families.	 First	 he’ll	 tell	 them	 he’s	 going	 to
repeat	a	word	several	times,	and	he	asks	them	just	to	notice	what
it	feels	like	in	their	bodies.	The	�rst	word	is	“no,”	said	�rmly	and
slightly	harshly	seven	times,	with	about	two	seconds	between	each
“no.”	 Then,	 after	 another	 pause,	 he	 says	 a	 clear	 but	 somewhat
gentler	 “yes”	 seven	 times.	 Afterward,	 clients	 often	 say	 that	 the
“no”	felt	sti�ing	and	angering,	as	if	they	were	being	shut	down	or
scolded.	In	contrast,	the	“yes”	made	them	feel	calm,	peaceful,	even
light.	 (You	 might	 close	 your	 eyes	 now	 and	 try	 the	 exercise	 for
yourself.	Notice	what	goes	on	in	your	body	as	you	or	a	friend	says
“no”	and	then	“yes”	several	times.)
These	 two	 di�erent	 responses—the	 “no”	 feelings	 and	 the	 “yes”
feelings—demonstrate	 what	 we	 mean	 when	 we	 talk	 about
reactivity	versus	receptivity.	When	the	nervous	system	is	reactive,
it’s	actually	in	a	�ght-�ight-freeze	response	state,	from	which	it’s
almost	 impossible	 to	 connect	 in	 an	 open	 and	 caring	 way	 with
another	 person.	 Remember	 the	 amygdala	 and	 the	 other	 parts	 of
your	 downstairs	 brain	 that	 react	 immediately,	 without	 thinking,
whenever	 you	 feel	 threatened?	 When	 our	 entire	 focus	 is	 on	 self-
defense,	no	matter	what	we	do,	we	stay	in	that	reactive,	“no”	state
of	mind.	We	become	guarded,	unable	to	join	with	someone	else—
by	 listening	 well,	 by	 giving	 them	 the	 bene�t	 of	 the	 doubt,	 by
considering	their	feelings,	and	so	on.	Even	neutral	comments	can
transform	into	�ghting	words,	distorting	what	we	hear	to	�t	what
we	fear.	This	is	how	we	enter	a	reactive	state	and	prepare	to	�ght,
to	flee,	or	even	to	freeze.
On	 the	 other	 hand,	 when	 we’re	 receptive,	 a	 di�erent	 set	 of
circuits	in	the	brain	becomes	active.	The	“yes”	part	of	the	exercise,
for	 most	 people,	 produces	 a	 positive	 experience.	 The	 muscles	 of
their	face	and	vocal	cords	relax,	their	blood	pressure	and	heart	rate
normalize,	and	they	become	more	open	to	experiencing	whatever
another	 person	 wants	 to	 express.	 In	 short,	 they	 become	 more
receptive.	 Whereas	 reactivity	 emerges	 from	 our	 downstairs	 brain
and	leaves	us	feeling	shut	down,	upset,	and	defensive,	a	receptive
state	 turns	 on	 the	 social	 engagement	 system	 that	 involves	 a
di�erent	 set	 of	 circuits	 of	 the	 upstairs	 brain	 that	 connects	 us	 to
others,	allowing	us	to	feel	safe	and	seen.
When	 interacting	 with	 our	 kids,	 it	 can	 be	 extremely	 helpful	 to
decipher	whether	they’re	in	a	reactive	or	receptive	state	of	mind.
This	of	course	requires	mindsight	on	our	part.	We	need	to	consider
where	 our	 kids	 are	 emotionally	 (and	 where	 we	 ourselves	 are)	 at
any	 given	 moment.	 If	 your	 four-year-old	 is	 screaming	 “I	 wanna
swing	 longer!”	 as	 you	 carry	 her	 under	 one	 arm	 away	 from	 the
park,	 that	 may	 not	 be	 the	 best	 time	 to	 talk	 to	 her	 about
appropriate	ways	of	handling	big	emotions.	Wait	until	this	reactive
state	 passes;	 then,	 when	 she’s	 more	 receptive,	 talk	 to	 her	 about
how	you’d	like	to	see	her	respond	the	next	time	she’s	disappointed.
Likewise,	 when	 your	 eleven-year-old	 �nds	 out	 that	 he	 didn’t	 get
accepted	into	the	art	program	he’d	set	his	heart	on,	you	may	need
to	 hold	 o�	 on	 word-heavy	 pronouncements	 of	 hope	 and
alternatives.	The	downstairs	state	of	reactivity	doesn’t	know	what
to	do	with	a	lot	of	upstairs	words.	Often,	in	moments	of	reactivity,
nonverbals	 (like	 hugs	 and	 empathetic	 facial	 expressions)	 will	 be
much	more	powerful.
Over	time,	we	want	to	help	our	children	become	more	receptive
to	relationships,	and	help	them	develop	mindsight	skills	that	will
let	them	join	with	others.	Then	receptivity	can	lead	to	resonance—
a	way	of	joining	from	the	inside	out—that	will	allow	them	to	enjoy
the	 depth	 and	 intimacy	 that	 come	 with	 meaningful	 relationships.
Otherwise,	a	child	is	left	adrift,	motivated	by	a	sense	of	isolation
rather	than	a	desire	and	ability	to	join.
One	�nal	note	before	we	turn	to	steps	we	can	take	to	encourage
receptivity	 and	 relational	 skills:	 as	 we	 help	 children	 be	 more
receptive	 to	 joining	 with	 others,	 we	 need	 to	 keep	 in	 mind	 the
importance	of	maintaining	their	individual	identity	as	well.	For	a
ten-year-old	girl	who’s	doing	everything	within	her	power	to	�t	in
with	a	clique	of	mean	girls	at	school,	the	problem	may	not	be	that
she’s	not	receptive	enough	to	joining	a	“we.”	The	concern	for	her
may	be	just	the	opposite,	that	she’s	lost	sight	of	her	“me”	and	is
therefore	going	along	with	everything	this	set	of	bullies	tells	her	to
do.	 Any	 healthy	 relationship—whether	 it’s	 family,	 friendship,
romantic,	 or	 otherwise—is	 made	 up	 of	 healthy	 individuals	 in
connection	 with	 others.	 To	 become	 a	 part	 of	 a	 well-functioning
“we,”	a	person	needs	also	to	remain	an	individual	“me.”	Just	as	we
don’t	want	our	kids	to	be	only	right-brained	or	only	left-brained,
we	 also	 don’t	 want	 them	 to	 be	 only	 individualistic,	 leaving	 them
sel�sh	 and	 isolated,	 or	 only	 relational,	 leaving	 them	 needy,
dependent,	and	vulnerable	to	unhealthy	and	harmful	relationships.
We	 want	 them	 to	 be	 whole-brained,	 and	 enjoy	 integrated
relationships.
What	You	Can	Do:
Helping	Your	Child	Integrate	Self	and	Other
Whole-Brain	Strategy	#11:
Increase	the	Family	Fun	Factor:	Making	a	Point	to	Enjoy	Each
Other
Do	 you	 ever	 feel	 like	 you’re	 spending	 most	 of	 your	 time	 either
disciplining	the	kids	or	carting	them	from	one	activity	to	the	next,
and	 not	 enough	 time	 just	 enjoying	 being	 with	 them?	 If	 you	 do,
you’re	not	alone;	most	of	us	feel	this	from	time	to	time.	Sometimes
it’s	 easy	 to	 forget	 to	 just	 have	 fun	 as	 a	 family.	 Yet	 we	 are
hardwired	for	play	and	exploration	as	well	as	for	joining	with	one
another.	 In	 fact,	 “playful	 parenting”	 is	 one	 of	 the	 best	 ways	 to
prepare	 your	 children	 for	 relationships	 and	 encourage	 them	 to
connect	 with	 others.	 That’s	 because	 it	 gives	 them	 positive
experiences	being	with	the	people	they	spend	the	most	time	with:
their	parents.
Of	course	children	need	structure	and	boundaries	and	to	be	held
accountable	 for	 their	 behavior,	 but	 even	 as	 you	 maintain	 your
authority,	don’t	forget	to	have	fun	with	your	kids.	Play	games.	Tell
jokes.	Be	silly.	Take	an	interest	in	what	they	care	about.	The	more
they	enjoy	the	time	they	spend	with	you	and	the	rest	of	the	family,
the	more	they’ll	value	relationships	and	desire	more	positive	and
healthy	relational	experiences	in	the	future.
The	reason	is	simple.	With	every	fun,	enjoyable	experience	you
give	 your	 children	 while	 they	 are	 with	 the	 family,	 you	 provide
them	 with	 positive	 reinforcement	 about	 what	 it	 means	 to	 be	 in
loving	 relationship	 with	 others.	 One	 reason	 has	 to	 do	 with	 a
chemical	 in	 your	 brain	 called	 dopamine.	 Dopamine	 is	 a
neurotransmitter,	 which	 means	 that	 it	 enables	 communication
between	brain	cells.	Your	brain	cells	receive	what	some	people	call
“dopamine	 squirts”	 when	 something	 pleasurable	 happens	 to	 you,
and	it	motivates	you	to	want	to	do	it	again.	Scientists	who	study
addiction	 point	 to	 these	 dopamine	 surges	 as	 factors	 that	 lead
people	 to	 maintain	 a	 certain	 habit	 or	 addiction,	 even	 when	 they
know	 it’s	 bad	 for	 them.	 But	 we	 can	 also	 help	 produce	 dopamine
squirts	 that	 reinforce	 positive	 and	 healthy	 desires,	 like	 enjoying
family	 relationships.	 Dopamine	 is	 the	 chemical	 of	 reward—and
play	and	fun	are	rewarding	in	our	lives.
What	this	means	is	that	when	your	son	squeals	in	delight	when
you	dramatically	“die”	from	his	Peter	Pan	sword	thrust,	when	you
and	 your	 daughter	 dance	 together	 at	 a	 concert	 or	 in	 the	 living
room,	or	when	you	and	your	kids	work	together	on	a	gardening	or
construction	project,	the	experience	strengthens	the	bonds	between
you	 and	 teaches	 your	 kids	 that	 relationships	 are	 a�rming,
rewarding,	 and	 ful�lling.	 So	 give	 it	 a	 shot,	 maybe	 even	 tonight.
After	 dinner,	 call	 out,	 “Everybody	 take	 your	 plate	 back	 to	 the
kitchen,	 then	 �nd	 one	 blanket	 and	 meet	 me	 in	 the	 living	 room.
We’re	having	Popsicles	in	a	fort	tonight!”
Another	 fun	 family	 activity	 that	 also	 teaches	 receptivity	 is	 to
play	improv	games	together.	The	basic	concept	is	similar	to	what
improv	 comedians	 do	 when	 the	 audience	 gives	 them	 suggestions
and	 the	 comedians	 have	 to	 take	 the	 random	 ideas	 and	 combine
them	in	funny	ways	that	make	some	sort	of	sense.	If	you	and	your
kids	 are	 performers,	 you	 can	 actually	 do	 this	 kind	 of	 improv
together.	But	there	are	simpler	versions	of	the	activity	as	well.	Let
someone	begin	a	story,	then	after	one	sentence,	the	next	person	has
to	add	to	it,	followed	by	the	next	person,	and	so	on.	Games	and
activities	like	these	not	only	keep	the	family	fun	factor	high,	but
also	give	kids	practice	at	being	receptive	to	the	unexpected	turns
life	presents	them.	You	don’t	want	to	turn	the	game	into	a	serious
classroom	 experience,	 but	 watch	 for	 ways	 to	 explicitly	 connect
what	 you’re	 doing	 to	 the	 concept	 of	 receptivity.	 Spontaneity	and
creativity	are	important	abilities,	and	novelty	also	gets	dopamine
going.
The	fun-factor	principle	also	applies	to	the	experiences	you	give
your	 kids	 as	 siblings.	 Recent	 studies	 have	 found	 that	 the	 best
predictor	 for	 good	 sibling	 relationships	 later	 in	 life	 is	 how	 much
fun	the	kids	have	together	when	they’re	young.	The	rate	of	con�ict
can	even	be	high,	as	long	as	there’s	plenty	of	fun	to	balance	it	out.
The	 real	 danger	 comes	 when	 the	 siblings	 just	 ignore	 each	 other.
There	may	be	less	tension	to	deal	with,	but	that’s	also	a	recipe	for
a	cold	and	distant	relationship	as	adults.
So	if	you	want	to	develop	close	long-term	relationships	between
your	 kids,	 think	 of	 it	 as	 a	 math	 equation,	 where	 the	 amount	 of
enjoyment	they	share	together	should	be	greater	than	the	con�ict
they	experience.	You’re	never	going	to	get	the	con�ict	side	of	the
equation	 to	 zero.	 Siblings	 argue;	 they	 just	 do.	 But	 if	 you	 can
increase	the	other	side	of	the	equation,	giving	them	activities	that
produce	 positive	 emotions	 and	 memories,	 you’ll	 create	 strong
bonds	 between	 them	 and	 set	 up	 a	 relationship	 that	 has	 a	 good
chance	of	remaining	solid	for	life.
Some	sibling	fun	will	occur	naturally,	but	you	can	help	it	along,
too.	Break	out	a	new	box	of	sidewalk	chalk	and	have	them	create	a
crazy	 new	 monster	 together.	 Let	 them	 use	 the	 video	 camera	 to
make	a	movie.	Have	them	team	up	together	for	a	surprise	project
to	 give	 to	 a	 grandparent.	 However	 you	 do	 it—family	 bike	 rides,
board	 games,	 making	 cookies,	 teaming	 up	 against	 Mom	 with	 the
water	 guns,	 whatever—�nd	 ways	 to	 help	 your	 kids	 have	 fun
together	and	strengthen	the	bonds	that	connect	them.
You	can	also	use	fun,	and	even	silliness,	to	shift	your	children’s
state	of	mind	when	they	become	stuck	in	an	angry	or	de�ant	state.
Sometimes	 they	 won’t	 be	 in	 the	 mood	 to	 have	 you	 act	 silly	 or
playful,	 so	 be	 sensitive	 to	 the	 cues	 you	 receive,	 especially	 with
older	kids.	But	if	you’re	sensitive	to	how	your	playfulness	will	be
received,	 this	 can	 be	 an	 extremely	 powerful	 and	 easily
implemented	way	to	help	children	shift	how	they	are	feeling.
Your	 state	 of	 mind	 can	 in�uence	 your	 child’s	 state	 of	 mind,
letting	 you	 transform	 fussiness	 and	 irritability	 into	 fun,	 laughter,
and	connection.
Whole-Brain	Strategy	#12:
Connection	Through	Conflict:	Teach	Kids	to	Argue	with	a
“We”	in	Mind
We	might	wish	we	could	somehow	help	our	kids	avoid	all	con�ict,
but	we	can’t.	If	they’re	going	to	be	in	relationships,	they’re	going	to
face	quarrels	and	disagreements.	We	can,	though,	teach	them	some
basic	 mindsight	 skills	 so	 they’ll	 know	 how	 to	 manage	 con�ict	 in
healthy	 and	 productive	 ways,	 and	 respond	 when	 things	 don’t	 go
perfectly	as	they	interact	with	others.
Once	again,	each	new	disagreement	is	more	than	just	a	di�culty
to	survive.	It	represents	another	opportunity	for	you	to	teach	your
children	 important	 lessons	 so	 they	 can	 thrive,	 in	 this	 case
relationally.	 Handling	 con�ict	 well	 isn’t	 easy,	 even	 for	 adults,	 so
we	 can’t	 expect	 too	 much	 of	 our	 children.	 But	 there	 are	 some
simple	 skills	 we	 can	 teach	 them	 that	 will	 help	 us	 all	 survive
individual	 con�icts,	 as	 well	 as	 help	 our	 children	 thrive	 as	 they
move	 toward	 adulthood.	 Let’s	 look	 at	 three	 of	 these	 mindsight-
building	skills.
See	Through	the	Other	Person’s	Eyes:	Help	Kids	Recognize	Other	Points
of	View
Does	this	scenario	sound	familiar?	You’re	working	at	your	desk	and
your	seven-year-old	daughter	approaches.	She’s	clearly	angry.	She
announces	that	her	younger	brother,	Mark,	just	called	her	stupid.
You	 ask	 why	 he	 might	 have	 said	 that,	 and	 your	 daughter	 is
adamant	that	there’s	no	reason—he	just	said	it!
It	can	be	di�cult	for	any	of	us	to	see	things	from	someone	else’s
perspective.	We	see	what	we	see,	and	often	only	what	we	want	to
see.	But	the	more	we	can	use	our	mindsight	to	view	events	through
the	eyes	of	another,	the	better	chance	we	have	of	resolving	con�ict
in	a	healthy	manner.
That’s	a	tough	skill	to	teach	children,	especially	in	the	middle	of
a	heated	argument.	But	if	we	ourselves	can	remain	aware	of	what
we’re	 actually	 saying,	 we	 have	 a	 better	 chance	 of	 teaching	 the
lessons	 we	 want.	 For	 example,	 your	 inclination	 might	 be	 to	 say,
“Well,	what	did	you	do	to	Mark?	I’m	sure	he	didn’t	just	call	you
stupid	out	of	the	blue!”
But	 if	 you	 can	 remain	 calm	 and	 aware	 of	 what	 you	 want	 to
teach,	 you	 might	 go	 at	 the	 conversation	 a	 bit	 di�erently.	 First
you’d	 want	 to	 demonstrate	 an	 awareness	 of	 your	 daughter’s
feelings.	 (Remember,	 connect	 �rst,	 then	 redirect.)	 This	 will
decrease	your	daughter’s	defensiveness	and	prepare	her	to	see	how
her	brother	feels.	Then	you	could	aim	for	the	goal	of	creating	some
empathy	in	your	daughter.
Granted,	we	won’t	always	get	through	to	our	kids.	But	by	asking
questions	 about	 how	 another	 person	 feels,	 about	 why	 someone
reacted	as	he	did,	we	can	encourage	empathy	in	our	children.	The
act	of	considering	the	mind	of	another	requires	us	to	use	our	right
hemisphere	and	our	upstairs	brain,	both	of	which	are	part	of	the
social	 circuitry	 that	 allows	 us	 to	 enjoy	 mature	 and	 ful�lling
relationships.
Listen	to	What’s	Not	Being	Said:
Teach	Kids	About	Nonverbal	Communication	and	Attuning	to	Others
It’s	 great	 that	 we	 teach	 our	 children	 to	 pay	 attention	 to	 what
people	are	saying:	“Listen	to	his	words.	He	said	he	didn’t	want	 to
be	sprayed	by	the	hose!”	But	an	important	part	of	relationships	is
listening	 to	 what’s	not	 being	 said.	 Usually	 kids	 aren’t	 naturally
skilled	 at	 this.	 That’s	 why,	 when	 you	 reprimand	 your	 son	 for
making	his	little	sister	cry	by	dipping	his	pretzels	into	her	yogurt,
he	responds,	“But	she	likes	it!	We’re	playing	a	game.”
Nonverbal	clues	sometimes	communicate	even	more	than	words,
so	we	need	to	help	our	children	use	their	right	hemisphere	to	get
good	at	understanding	what	other	people	are	saying,	even	if	they
never	 open	 their	 mouth.	 With	 the	 mirror	 neuron	 system	 already
working,	all	kids	need	is	for	us	to	help	them	make	explicit	what
their	 mirror	 neurons	 are	 communicating.	 For	 example,	 after
winning	a	big	soccer	game,	your	son	might	need	you	to	help	him
notice	that	his	friend	on	the	other	team	is	in	need	of	some	cheering
up,	 even	 if	 he	 says	 he’s	 �ne.	 As	 evidence,	 you	 can	 point	 to	 the
friend’s	 body	 language	 and	 facial	 expressions—the	 drooping
shoulders,	 the	 lowered	 head,	 the	 downcast	 face.	 By	 helping	 your
son	make	these	simple	observations	you’ll	increase	his	mindsight,
and	for	the	rest	of	his	life	he’ll	be	better	equipped	to	read	others
and	tune	in	to	their	feelings.
Repair:	Teach	Kids	to	Make	Things	Right	After	a	Conflict
We	know	the	importance	of	apologizing,	and	we	teach	our	children
to	 say	 they’re	 sorry.	 But	 kids	 also	 need	 to	 realize	 that	 at	 times,
that’s	 only	 the	 beginning.	 Sometimes	 they	 need	 to	 take	 steps	 to
right	whatever	they’ve	done	wrong.
The	situation	might	call	for	a	speci�c,	direct	response:	repairing
or	 replacing	 a	 broken	 toy,	 or	 helping	 to	 rebuild	 some	 sort	 of
project.	 Or	 a	 more	 relational	 response	 might	 be	 warranted,	 like
drawing	the	other	person	a	picture,	performing	an	act	of	kindness,
or	writing	a	letter	of	apology.	The	point	is	that	you’re	helping	your
kids	 demonstrate	 acts	 of	 love	 and	 contrition	 that	 show	 they’ve
thought	about	another’s	feelings	and	want	to	�nd	a	way	to	repair
the	rupture	in	the	relationship.
This	 connects	 directly	 to	 the	 two	 whole-brain	 strategies	 above,
about	empathy	and	attuning	to	others’	feelings.	To	sincerely	want
to	make	things	right,	a	child	must	understand	how	the	other	person
is	feeling	and	why	that	person	is	upset.	Then	the	parent	can	more
pro�tably	bring	up	the	question	“If	it	were	you	and	your	favorite
thing	 were	 broken,	 what	 would	 help	 you	 feel	 better?”	 Each	 new
movement	 toward	 considering	 someone	 else’s	 feelings	 creates
stronger	connections	in	the	relational	circuitry	of	the	brain.	When
we	break	through	our	children’s	defensiveness	and	their	reluctance
to	 accept	 responsibility,	 we	 can	 help	 them	 be	 thoughtful	 about
others	they’ve	hurt,	and	make	an	e�ort	toward	reconnection.	We
help	 them	 develop	 mindsight.	 Sometimes	 a	 sincere	 apology	 is
enough,	 especially	 when	 combined	 with	 honesty	 and	 sincerity:	 “I
did	that	because	I	was	feeling	jealous,	and	I’m	sorry.”	But	kids	also
need	to	learn	what	it	means	to	go	the	extra	mile	and	take	speci�c
steps	toward	reconciliation.
Let’s	 return	 to	 Colin,	 the	 seven-year-old	 whose	 parents	 felt	 he
was	too	sel�sh.	We	wish	we	could	o�er	Ron	and	Sandy	some	sort
of	magic	bullet,	a	cure-all	for	egocentrism	and	other	developmental
frustrations	they	encounter	with	their	son.	But	obviously	we	can’t.
The	good	news,	though,	is	that	simply	by	loving	Colin	and	helping
him	 see	 the	 bene�ts	 of	 relationships—beginning	 with	 his
interactions	 with	 his	 parents	 and	 brother—Ron	 and	 Sandy	 are
already	helping	him	understand	the	importance	of	considering	and
connecting	with	others.
Beyond	 that,	 by	 emphasizing	 the	 “connection	 through	 con�ict”
skills	 we’re	 discussing	 here,	 they	 can	 help	 him	 continue	 moving
toward	considering	the	feelings	of	others.	For	example,	when	Colin
redecorated	 his	 room	 and	 removed	 his	 brother’s	 belongings,	 this
presented	a	teachable	moment,	which	his	parents	could	use	to	help
Colin	learn	a	lot	about	being	in	relationship.	Too	often	we	forget
that	 “discipline”	 really	 means	 “to	 teach”—not	 “to	 punish.”	 A
disciple	 is	 a	 student,	 not	 a	 recipient	 of	 behavioral	 consequences.
When	 we	 teach	 mindsight,	 we	 take	 moments	 of	 con�ict	 and
transform	them	into	opportunities	for	learning,	skill	building,	and
brain	development.
In	 that	 moment,	 Ron	 could	 ask	 Colin	 to	 look	 at	 his	 brother,
crying	as	he	picked	up	and	straightened	out	his	various	paintings,
and	 notice	 the	 nonverbal	 evidence	 of	 how	 hurt	 Logan	 was.	 This
could	lead	to	a	thoughtful	discussion	about	how	Logan	viewed	the
scene—the	 crumpled	 paintings,	 the	 thrown-aside	 trophies.	 Simply
getting	Colin	to	actually	see	Logan’s	perspective	would	be	a	pretty
big	breakthrough	with	long-lasting	bene�ts.	A	mere	time-out	might
or	might	not	teach	Colin	not	to	remove	his	brother’s	things	without
permission,	but	it	wouldn’t	generalize	into	a	mindsight	skill.
Finally,	 Ron	 and	 Sandy	 could	 discuss	 what	 should	 happen	 to
make	things	right,	including	having	Colin	apologize	and	work	with
Logan	to	create	some	new	paintings	to	hang	on	the	shared	wall	in
the	room.	By	choosing	to	use	the	situation	for	growth	and	teaching,
rather	 than	 avoiding	 it	 as	 an	 unpleasant	 obstacle,	 Colin’s	 parents
could	convert	some	fairly	intense	con�ict	into	a	thrive	moment	and
help	both	of	their	sons	learn	important	lessons	about	what	it	means
to	be	in	a	relationship.	The	key	is	opening	up	mindsight’s	lens	to
make	 the	 perception	 of	 each	 boy’s	 inner	 world	 available	 for
inspection.
Mindsight	permits	children	to	sense	the	importance	of	the	inner
life	of	thoughts	and	feelings.	Without	such	development,	behaviors
become	 just	 interactions	 a	 child	 responds	 to	 from	 the	 surface,
something	 to	 “deal	 with”	 as	 an	 automatic	 reaction	 without
re�ection.	 Parents	 are	 a	 child’s	 �rst	 mindsight	 teachers,	 using
challenging	moments	to	engage	a	child’s	own	circuits	of	re�ection
to	 view	 our	 shared	 inner	 worlds.	 As	 children	 develop	 these
mindsight	skills,	they	can	learn	to	balance	the	importance	of	their
own	inner	lives	with	those	of	others.	These	re�ective	skills	are	also
the	 basis	 for	 how	 children	 learn	 to	 balance	 their	 own	 emotions
while	 understanding	 the	 emotional	 lives	 of	 the	 people	 around
them.	 Mindsight	 is	 the	 basis	 of	 both	 social	 and	 emotional
intelligence.	 It	 allows	 children	 to	 learn	 that	 they	 are	 a	 part	 of	 a
larger	world	of	relationships	where	feelings	matter	and	connections
are	a	source	of	reward,	meaning,	and	fun.
Whole-Brain	Kids:
Teach	Your	Kids	About	Integrating	the	Self	with	the	Other
Now	 that	 you’ve	 learned	 a	 good	 bit	 about	 mindsight,	 here’s
something	you	can	read	to	your	own	child	to	introduce	the	concept
of	seeing	your	own	and	each	other’s	minds.
Integrating	Ourselves:	Making	Sense	of	Our	Own	Story
The	 most	 important	 “we”	 in	 your	 life	 as	 a	 parent	 is	 the
relationship	 you	 share	 with	 your	 child.	 That	 relationship
signi�cantly	impacts	your	child’s	future.	Research	studies	have
consistently	 shown	 that	 when	 parents	 o�er	 repeated,
predictable	 experiences	 in	 which	 they	 see	 and	 sensitively
respond	to	their	children’s	emotions	and	needs,	their	children
will	 thrive—socially,	 emotionally,	 physically,	 and	 even
academically.	While	it’s	not	exactly	a	revelation	that	kids	do
better	when	they	enjoy	strong	relationships	with	their	parents,
what	may	surprise	you	is	what	produces	this	kind	of	parent-
child	 connection.	 It’s	 not	 how	 our	 parents	 raised	 us,	 or	 how
many	 parenting	 books	 we’ve	 read.	 It’s	 actually	 how	 well
we’ve	 made	 sense	 of	 our	 experiences	 with	 our	 own	 parents
and	how	sensitive	we	are	to	our	children	that	most	powerfully
in�uence	 our	 relationship	 with	 our	 kids,	 and	 therefore	 how
well	they	thrive.
It	 all	 comes	 down	 to	 what	 we	 call	 our	 life	 narrative,	 the
story	 we	 tell	 when	 we	 look	 at	 who	 we	 are	 and	 how	 we’ve
become	the	person	that	we	are.	Our	life	narrative	determines
our	feelings	about	our	past,	our	understanding	of	why	people
(like	our	parents)	behaved	as	they	did,	and	our	awareness	of
the	 way	 those	 events	 have	 impacted	 our	 development	 into
adulthood.	When	we	have	a	coherent	life	narrative,	we	have
made	sense	of	how	the	past	has	contributed	to	who	we	are	and
what	we	do.
A	life	narrative	that	hasn’t	been	examined	and	made	sense
of	may	limit	us	in	the	present,	and	may	also	cause	us	to	parent
reactively	 and	 pass	 down	 to	 our	 children	 the	 same	 painful
legacy	 that	 negatively	 a�ected	 our	 own	 early	 days.	 For
instance,	 imagine	 that	 your	 father	 had	 a	 di�cult	 childhood.
Perhaps	his	home	was	an	emotional	desert,	where	his	parents
didn’t	comfort	him	when	he	was	afraid	or	sad,	and	they	were
even	cold	and	distant,	leaving	him	to	weather	life’s	hardships
on	 his	 own.	 If	 they	 failed	 to	 pay	 attention	 to	 him	 and	 his
emotions,	 he	 would	 be	 wounded	 in	 signi�cant	 ways.	 As	 a
result,	he	would	grow	into	adulthood	limited	in	his	ability	to
give	you	what	you	need	as	his	child.	He	might	be	incapable	of
intimacy	and	relationship;	he	could	have	di�culty	responding
to	your	emotions	and	needs,	telling	you	to	“toughen	up”	when
you	felt	sad	or	alone	or	afraid.	All	of	this	might	even	result
from	 implicit	 memories	 of	 which	 he’d	 have	 no	 awareness.
Then	 you,	 as	 you	 became	 an	 adult	 and	 a	 parent	 yourself,
would	 be	 in	 danger	 of	 passing	 down	 the	 same	 damaging
patterns	to	your	own	kids.	That’s	the	bad	news.
The	good	news,	though—the	better-than-good	news—is	that
if	 you	 make	 sense	 of	 your	 experiences	 and	understand	 your
father’s	woundedness	and	relational	limitations,	you	can	break
the	cycle	of	handing	down	such	pain.	You	can	begin	to	re�ect
on	those	experiences	and	how	they’ve	impacted	you.
You	 might	 be	 tempted	 to	 simply	 parent	 in	 a	 way	 exactly
opposite	of	how	your	parents	did	it.	But	the	idea,	instead,	is	to
openly	 re�ect	 on	 how	 your	 experiences	 with	 your	 parents
have	 a�ected	 you.	 You	 may	 need	 to	 deal	 with	 implicit
memories	 that	 are	 in�uencing	 you	 without	 your	 realizing	 it.
Sometimes	it	can	be	helpful	to	do	this	work	with	a	therapist,
or	share	your	experiences	with	a	friend.	However	you	do	it,
it’s	important	that	you	begin	getting	clear	on	your	own	story,
because	 through	 mirror	 neurons	 and	 implicit	 memory,	 we
directly	pass	on	our	emotional	life	to	our	children—for	better
or	 for	 worse.	 Knowing	 that	 our	 kids	 live	 with	 and	 through
whatever	 we’re	 experiencing	 is	 a	 powerful	 insight	 that	 can
motivate	 us	 to	 begin	 and	 continue	 our	 journey	 toward
understanding	 our	 own	 stories,	 the	 joys	 as	 well	 as	 the	 pain.
Then	we	can	attune	to	the	needs	and	signals	of	our	children,
creating	secure	attachment	and	strong	and	healthy	connection.
Research	shows	that	even	adults	who	experienced	less-than-
optimal	 childhoods	 can	 parent	 every	 bit	 as	 e�ectively,	 and
raise	children	who	feel	just	as	loved	and	securely	attached,	as
those	 whose	 home	 life	 was	 more	 consistent	 and	 loving.	 It’s
never	 too	 late	 to	 begin	 working	 on	 your	 coherent	 life
narrative,	and	as	you	do,	your	children	will	reap	the	rewards.
We	 want	 to	 make	 this	 point	 as	 clearly	 as	 possible:	 early
experience	is	not	fate.	By	making	sense	of	your	past	you	can
free	 yourself	 from	 what	 might	 otherwise	 be	 a	 cross-
generational	 legacy	 of	 pain	 and	 insecure	 attachment,	 and
instead	create	an	inheritance	of	nurturance	and	love	for	your
children.
CONCLUSION
Bringing	it	All	Together
We	 all	 have	 hopes	 and	 dreams	 for	 our	 children.	 For	 most	 of	 us,
they	 involve	 wanting	 our	 kids	 to	 be	 happy,	 healthy,	 and	 fully
themselves.	Our	message	throughout	this	book	has	been	that	you
can	help	create	this	reality	for	your	kids	by	paying	attention	during
the	 everyday,	 ordinary	 experiences	 you	 share	 with	 them.	 That
means	 you	 can	 use	 the	 obvious	 teachable	 moments,	 but	 also	 the
di�cult	challenges	and	even	the	humdrum	“nothing’s	really	going
on”	 times,	 as	 opportunities	 to	 prepare	 your	 children	 to	 be	 happy
and	 successful,	 to	 enjoy	 good	 relationships,	 and	 to	 feel	 content
with	who	they	are.	In	short,	to	be	whole-brain	children.
One	 of	 the	 main	 bene�ts	 of	 the	 whole-brain	 perspective,	 as
we’ve	 discussed,	 is	 that	 it	 empowers	 you	 to	 transform	 the	 daily
parenting	challenges	that	can	interrupt	the	fun	and	connection	you
have	with	your	children.	Whole-brain	parenting	allows	you	to	go
far	beyond	mere	survival.	This	approach	promotes	connection	and
a	 deeper	 understanding	 between	 you	 and	 your	 children.	 An
awareness	of	integration	gives	you	the	competence	and	con�dence
to	handle	things	in	ways	that	make	you	closer	to	your	kids,	so	you
can	 know	 their	 minds,	 and	 therefore	 help	 shape	 their	 minds	 in
positive	and	healthy	ways.	As	a	result,	not	only	will	your	children
thrive,	but	your	relationship	with	them	will	flourish	as	well.
So	 whole-brain	 parenting	 isn’t	 just	 about	 who	 your	 adorable—
and	 at	 times	 no	 doubt	 exasperating—child	 is	 right	 now,	 but	 also
about	who	she	will	become	in	the	future.	It’s	about	integrating	her
brain,	nurturing	her	mind,	and	giving	her	skills	that	will	bene�t	her
as	 she	 grows	 into	 adolescence	 and	 adulthood.	 By	 encouraging
integration	 in	 your	 children	 and	 helping	 develop	 their	 upstairs
brain,	you	prepare	them	to	be	better	friends,	better	spouses,	and
better	parents.	For	example,	when	a	child	learns	how	to	SIFT	for
the	 sensations,	 images,	 feelings,	 and	 thoughts	 in	 his	 mind,	 he’ll
have	a	much	deeper	understanding	of	himself,	and	he’ll	therefore
be	better	able	to	control	himself	and	connect	with	others.	Likewise,
by	teaching	about	connection	through	con�ict,	you	give	your	child
the	 invaluable	 gift	 of	 seeing	 that	 even	 unpleasant	 arguments	 are
opportunities	to	engage	with	and	learn	from	the	minds	of	others.
Integration	is	about	surviving	and	thriving,	and	about	your	child’s
well-being	now	and	in	the	future.
It’s	extraordinary	when	you	think	about	the	generational	impact
of	 the	 whole-brain	 approach.	 Do	 you	 realize	 the	 power	 you	 now
have	 to	 e�ect	 positive	 change	 in	 the	 future?	 By	 giving	 your
children	the	gift	of	using	their	whole	brain,	you’re	impacting	not
just	 their	 lives,	 but	 also	 those	 of	 the	 people	 with	 whom	 they
interact.	Remember	mirror	neurons	and	how	social	the	brain	is?	As
we’ve	explained,	your	child’s	brain	isn’t	an	isolated,	“single	skull”
organ,	 acting	 in	 a	 vacuum.	 Self	 and	 family	 and	 community	 are
fundamentally	connected	neurologically.	Even	in	our	busy,	driven,
and	often	isolated	lives,	we	can	remember	this	fundamental	reality,
that	we’re	all	interdependent	and	connected	with	one	another.
Children	 who	 learn	 this	 truth	 have	 the	 chance	 not	 only	 to
develop	happiness	and	meaning	and	wisdom	in	their	own	lives,	but
to	 pass	 their	 knowledge	 along	 to	 others	 as	 well.	 When,	 for
example,	 you	 help	 your	 kids	 use	 their	 internal	 remote	 to	 make
their	implicit	memories	explicit,	you’re	helping	create	within	them
the	skill	of	self-re�ection	that	will	make	them	much	more	capable
of	meaningful	interactions	with	others	throughout	their	lives.	The
same	goes	for	teaching	them	about	their	wheel	of	awareness.	Once
they	 understand	 about	 integrating	 the	 many	 parts	 of	 themselves,
they’ll	be	able	to	comprehend	themselves	much	more	deeply	and
actively	 choose	 how	 they	 interact	 with	 the	 people	 around	 them.
They	can	captain	the	ship	of	their	lives,	more	easily	avoiding	the
banks	 of	 chaos	 and	 rigidity,	 and	 more	 often	 remaining	 in	 the
harmonious	flow	of	well-being.
We’ve	 found	 time	 and	 again	 that	 teaching	 people	 about
integration	 and	 how	 to	 apply	 it	 in	 their	 daily	 lives	 has	 deep	 and
lasting	 positive	 e�ects.	 For	 kids,	 this	 approach	 can	 change	 the
direction	 of	 how	 they	 develop	 and	 set	 the	 stage	 for	 a	 life	 of
meaning,	 kindness,	 �exibility,	 and	 resilience.	 Some	 children	 who
have	been	raised	with	a	whole-brain	approach	will	say	things	that
seem	wise	beyond	their	years.	A	three-year-old	we	know	became
so	good	at	identifying	and	communicating	seemingly	contradictory
emotions	 that	 he	 told	 his	 parents,	 when	 they	 returned	 after	 he’d
spent	an	evening	with	his	babysitter,	“I	missed	you	guys	when	you
were	 gone,	 but	 I	 also	 had	 fun	 with	 Katie.”	 And	 a	 seven-year-old
told	her	parents	on	the	way	to	a	family	picnic,	“I’ve	decided	not	to
fuss	 about	 my	 hurt	 thumb	 at	 the	 park.	 I’ll	 just	 tell	 people	 I	 hurt
myself,	 and	 then	 have	 fun	 and	 play	 anyway.”	 This	 level	 of	 self-
awareness	may	seem	remarkable	in	children	so	young,	but	it	shows
you	what’s	possible	with	the	whole-brain	approach.	When	you’ve
become	 the	 active	 author	 of	 your	 life	 story	 and	 not	 merely	 the
passive	scribe	of	history	as	it	unfolds,	you	can	create	a	life	that	you
love.
You	 can	 see	 how	 this	 kind	 of	 self-awareness	 would	 lead	 to
healthier	relationships	down	the	road,	and	especially	what	it	could
mean	for	your	children’s	own	kids	when	they	become	parents.	By
raising	 a	 whole-brain	 child,	 you’re	 actually	 o�ering	 your	 future
grandchildren	an	important	gift.	For	a	moment,	close	your	eyes	and
imagine	your	child	holding	his	child,	and	realize	the	power	of	what
you	are	passing	on.	And	it	won’t	stop	there.	Your	grandchildren	can
take	what	they	learn	from	their	parents	and	pass	it	further	along	as
a	 continuing	 legacy	 of	 joy	 and	 happiness.	 Imagine	 watching	 your
own	children	connect	and	redirect	with	your	grandchildren!	This	is
how	we	integrate	our	lives	across	the	generations.
We	hope	this	vision	will	inspire	you	to	become	the	parent	you
want	to	be.	Granted,	sometimes	you’ll	fall	short	of	your	ideals.	And
yes,	much	of	what	we’ve	shared	requires	real	e�ort	on	the	part	of
you	and	your	children.	It’s	not	always	easy,	after	all,	to	go	back
and	 retell	 stories	 about	 painful	 experiences,	 or	 to	 remember	 to
engage	the	upstairs	when	your	child	is	upset,	rather	than	triggering
the	 downstairs.	 But	 every	 whole-brain	 strategy	 o�ers	 practical
steps	you	can	take	right	now	to	make	your	life	as	a	family	better
and	 more	 manageable.	 You	 don’t	 need	 to	 become	 a	 perfect
superparent	 or	 follow	 some	 sort	 of	 prescribed	 agenda	 that
programs	 your	 kids	 to	 be	 ideal	 little	 robot	 children.	 You’ll	 still
make	plenty	of	mistakes	(just	as	we	do),	and	so	will	your	kids	(just
as	ours	do).	But	the	beauty	of	the	whole-brain	perspective	is	that	it
lets	you	understand	that	even	the	mistakes	are	opportunities	to	grow
and	 learn.	 This	 approach	 involves	 being	 intentional	 about	 what
we’re	doing	and	where	we’re	going,	while	accepting	that	we	are	all
human.	Intention	and	attention	are	our	goals,	not	some	rigid,	harsh
expectation	of	perfection.
Once	you	discover	the	whole-brain	approach,	you’ll	likely	want
to	 share	 it	 with	 the	 others	 in	 your	 life	 who	 will	 join	 you	 in	 this
great	 responsibility	 of	 raising	 the	 future.	 Whole-brain	 parents
become	 enthusiastic	 about	 sharing	 what	 they	 know	 with	 other
parents	as	well	as	with	teachers	and	caregivers	who	can	work	as	a
team	 to	 promote	 health	 and	 well-being	 in	 their	 children.	 As	 you
create	 a	 whole-brain	 family,	 you	 also	 join	 a	 broader	 vision	 of
creating	an	entire	society	full	of	rich,	relational	communities	where
emotional	 well-being	 is	 nurtured	 for	 this	 and	 future	 generations.
We	 are	 all	 synaptically	 and	 socially	 connected,	 and	 bringing
integration	into	our	lives	creates	a	world	of	well-being.
You	can	see	how	passionately	we	believe	in	the	positive	impact
parents	 can	 have	 on	 their	 children	 and	 on	 society	 as	 a	 whole.
There’s	nothing	more	important	you	can	do	as	a	parent	than	to	be
intentional	about	the	way	you’re	shaping	your	child’s	mind.	What
you	do	matters	profoundly.
That	being	said,	don’t	put	too	much	pressure	on	yourself.	We’ve
emphasized	 the	 importance	 of	 taking	 advantage	 of	 the	 moments
you	have	with	your	kids,	but	it’s	not	realistic	to	think	you	can	do
this	100	percent	of	the	time.	The	point	is	to	remain	aware	of	the
daily	 opportunities	 to	 nurture	 your	 kids’	 development.	 But	that
doesn’t	mean	you	have	to	be	constantly	talking	about	the	brain	or
repeatedly	 prodding	 your	 children	 to	 recall	 signi�cant	 events	 in
their	 lives.	 It’s	 just	 as	 important	 to	 relax	 and	 have	 fun	 together.
And	yes,	sometimes	it’s	even	okay	to	let	a	teachable	moment	pass
by.
We	 realize	 that	 all	 this	 talk	 about	 your	 power	 to	 shape	 your
children’s	 minds	 and	 in�uence	 the	 future	 can	 feel	 intimidating	 at
�rst,	 especially	 since	 genes	 and	 experiences	 a�ect	 kids	 in	 ways
parents	 simply	 can’t	 control.	 But	 if	 you	 really	 get	 the	 concept	 of
The	Whole-Brain	Child	at	its	essence,	you’ll	see	that	it	can	liberate
you	from	your	fears	that	you’re	not	doing	a	good	enough	job	with
your	 kids.	 It’s	 not	 your	 responsibility	 to	 avoid	 all	 mistakes,	 any
more	 than	 you’re	 supposed	 to	 remove	 all	 obstacles	 your	 children
face.	 Instead,	 your	 job	 is	 to	 be	 present	 with	 your	 children	 and
connect	with	them	through	the	ups	and	downs	of	life’s	journey.
The	great	news	The	Whole-Brain	Child	o�ers	is	that	even	the	hard
times	you	go	through	with	your	kids,	even	the	mistakes	you	make
as	you	parent,	are	opportunities	to	help	your	children	grow,	learn,
and	 develop	 into	 people	 who	 are	 happy,	 healthy,	 and	 fully
themselves.	Rather	than	ignoring	their	big	emotions	or	distracting
them	 from	 their	 struggles,	 you	 can	 nurture	 their	 whole	 brain,
walking	with	them	through	these	challenges,	staying	present	and	thus
strengthening	 the	 parent-child	 bond	 and	 helping	 your	 kids	 feel
seen,	 heard,	 and	 cared	 for.	 We	 hope	 what	 we’ve	 shared	 in	 these
pages	will	give	you	the	solid	foundation	and	inspiration	to	create
the	life	you	want	for	your	children	and	your	family,	now	and	for
the	years	and	generations	to	come.
REFRIGERATOR	SHEET
The	Whole-Brain	Child
by	Daniel	J.	Siegel	and	Tina	Payne	Bryson
To	download	a	printable	refrigerator	sheet,	please	visit	http://rhlink.com/wbc001
INTEGRATING	THE	LEFT	AND	RIGHT	BRAIN
•	Left	+	right	=	clarity	and	understanding:	Help	your	kids	use
both	the	logical	left	brain	and	the	emotional	right	brain	as	a
team.
•	What	you	can	do:
				•	Connect	and	redirect:	When	your	child	is	upset,	connect	first
emotionally,	right	brain	to	right	brain.	Then,	once	your	child	is
more	in	control	and	receptive,	bring	in	the	left-brain	lessons
and	discipline.
				•	Name	it	to	tame	it:	When	big,	right-brain	emotions	are	raging
out	of	control,	help	your	kids	tell	the	story	about	what’s
upsetting	them,	so	their	left	brain	can	help	make	sense	of	their
experience	and	they	can	feel	more	in	control.
INTEGRATING	THE	UPSTAIRS	BRAIN	AND	THE	DOWNSTAIRS
BRAIN
•	Develop	the	upstairs	brain:	Watch	for	ways	to	help	build	the
sophisticated	upstairs	brain,	which	is	“under	construction”	during
childhood	and	adolescence	and	can	be	“hijacked”	by	the
downstairs	brain,	especially	in	high-emotion	situations.
•	What	you	can	do:
				•	Engage,	don’t	enrage:	In	high-stress	situations,	engage	your
child’s	upstairs	brain,	rather	than	triggering	the	downstairs
brain.	Don’t	immediately	play	the	“Because	I	said	so!”	card.
Instead,	ask	questions,	request	alternatives,	even	negotiate.
				•	Use	it	or	lose	it:	Provide	lots	of	opportunities	to	exercise	the
upstairs	brain.	Play	“What	would	you	do?”	games,	and	avoid
rescuing	kids	from	difficult	decisions.
				•	Move	it	or	lose	it:	When	a	child	has	lost	touch	with	his	upstairs
brain,	help	him	regain	balance	by	having	him	move	his	body.
INTEGRATING	MEMORY
•	Make	the	implicit	explicit:	Help	your	kids	make	their	implicit
memories	explicit,	so	that	past	experiences	don’t	affect	them	in
debilitating	ways.
•	What	you	can	do:
				•	Use	the	remote	of	the	mind:	When	a	child	is	reluctant	to	narrate
a	painful	event,	the	internal	remote	lets	her	pause,	rewind,
and	fast-forward	a	story	as	she	tells	it,	so	she	can	maintain
control	over	how	much	of	it	she	views.
				•	Remember	to	remember:	Help	your	kids	exercise	their	memory
by	giving	them	lots	of	practice	at	recalling	important	events:	in
the	car,	at	the	dinner	table,	wherever.
INTEGRATING	THE	MANY	PARTS	OF	MYSELF
•	The	wheel	of	awareness:	When	your	kids	get	stuck	on	one
particular	point	on	the	rim	of	their	wheel	of	awareness,	help
them	choose	where	they	focus	their	attention	so	they	can	gain
more	control	over	how	they	feel.
•	What	you	can	do:
				•	Let	the	clouds	of	emotion	roll	by:	Remind	kids	that	feelings	come
and	go;	they	are	temporary	states,	not	enduring	traits.
				•	SIFT:	Help	your	children	pay	attention	to	the	Sensations,
Images,	Feelings,	and	Thoughts	within	them.
				•	Exercise	mindsight:	Mindsight	practices	teach	children	to	calm
themselves	and	focus	their	attention	where	they	want.
INTEGRATING	SELF	AND	OTHER
•	Wired	for	“we”:	Watch	for	ways	to	capitalize	on	the	brain’s
built-in	capacity	for	social	interaction.	Create	positive	mental
models	of	relationships.
•	What	you	can	do:
				•	Enjoy	each	other:	Build	fun	into	the	family,	so	that	your	kids
enjoy	positive	and	satisfying	experiences	with	the	people
they’re	with	the	most.
				•	Connect	through	conflict:	Instead	of	an	obstacle	to	avoid,	view
conflict	as	an	opportunity	to	teach	your	kids	essential
relationship	skills,	like	seeing	other	people’s	perspectives,
reading	nonverbal	cues,	and	making	amends.
Whole-Brain	Ages	and	Stages
As	 your	 kids	 get	 older,	 you	 may	 �nd	 yourself	 wanting	 help
applying	 the	 twelve	 whole-brain	 strategies	 to	 each	 new	 age	 and
stage.	With	that	in	mind,	we’ve	put	together	the	following	chart,
which	you	can	use	as	a	reference	guide	anytime	you	need	a	quick
refresher.	Some	of	what	we	recommend	below	will	overlap	across
di�erent	 ages	 since	 the	 strategies	 are	 relevant	 for	 di�erent
developmental	stages.	Our	goal	is	to	ensure	that	the	book	continues
to	 be	 a	 vital	 resource	 as	 your	 child	 grows	 and	 changes,	 and	 that
you	have	clear	and	speci�c	tools	at	your	disposal	for	each	stage	of
development.
Infant/Toddler	(0–3)
TYPE	OF	INTEGRATION
Integrating	the	Left	and	Right	Brain
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#1:	 Connect	 and	 redirect:	 When	 your	 child	 is	 upset,	 connect	 �rst
emotionally,	right	brain	to	right	brain.	Then,	once	she	is	more	in
control	and	receptive,	bring	in	the	left-brain	lessons	and	discipline.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
Now	is	the	time,	as	early	as	possible,	to	begin	teaching	your	child
about	emotions.	Mirror	feelings	and	use	nonverbals	(like	hugs	and
empathetic	facial	expressions)	to	show	that	you	understand:	You’re
frustrated,	 aren’t	 you?	 Then,	 once	 you’ve	 connected,	 set	 the
boundary:	Biting	 hurts.	 Please	 be	 gentle.	 Finally,	 focus	 on	 an
appropriate	alternative	or	move	on	to	something	else:	Hey,	there’s
your	bear.	I	haven’t	seen	him	in	a	long	time.
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#2:	Name	it	to	tame	it:	When	big,	right-brain	emotions	are	raging
out	of	control,	help	your	child	tell	the	story	about	what’s	upsetting
him.	 In	 doing	 so,	 he’ll	 use	 his	 left	 brain	 to	 make	 sense	 of	 his
experience	and	feel	more	in	control.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
Even	at	this	young	age,	make	it	a	habit	to	acknowledge	and	name
feelings:	You	 look	 so	 sad.	 That	 really	 hurt,	 didn’t	 it?	 Then	 tell	 the
story.	With	small	children,	you’ll	need	to	be	the	primary	narrator.
Use	 your	 words	 and	 even	 act	 out	 the	 fall	 or	 the	 bump,	 possibly
using	humor,	and	watch	your	child’s	fascination.	It	can	be	helpful
to	 make	 a	 homemade	 book	 with	 pictures	 or	 photos	 to	 retell	 an
upsetting	story,	or	to	prepare	your	child	for	a	transition,	like	a	new
bedtime	routine	or	starting	preschool.
TYPE	OF	INTEGRATION
Integrating	the	Upstairs	and	Downstairs
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#3:	 Engage,	 don’t	 enrage:	 In	 high-stress	 situations,	 engage	 your
child’s	 upstairs	 brain	 by	 asking	 her	 to	 consider	 and	 plan	 and
choose,	 rather	 than	 triggering	 her	 downstairs	 brain,	 which	 is	 less
about	thinking	and	more	about	reacting.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
Nobody	 likes	 to	 be	 told	 no,	 and	 it’s	 an	 especially	 ine�ective
strategy	 to	 use	 too	 often	 with	 toddlers.	 When	 possible,	 avoid
outright	 power	 struggles	 with	 your	 little	 one.	 Save	 your	 no	 for
when	you	really	need	it.	The	next	time	you	hear	yourself	beginning
to	forbid	her	from	hitting	the	mirror	with	the	stick,	stop.	Instead,
engage	 her	 upstairs	 brain:	Let’s	go	outside.	What	could	you	do	with
that	stick	in	the	yard?
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#4:	 Use	 it	 or	 lose	 it:	 Provide	 lots	 of	 opportunities	 to	 exercise	 the
upstairs	 brain	 so	 it	 can	 be	 strong	 and	 integrated	 with	 the
downstairs	brain	and	the	body.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
As	 often	 as	 possible,	 �nd	 ways	 to	 let	 your	 child	 use	 her	 upstairs
brain	and	make	decisions	for	herself.	Do	you	want	to	wear	your	blue
or	red	shirt	today?	Would	you	like	milk	or	water	with	dinner?	 When
you	read	together,	ask	brain-growing	questions:	How	do	you	think
the	kitty	will	get	down	from	the	tree?	Why	does	the	girl	look	sad?
TYPE	OF	INTEGRATION
Integrating	the	Upstairs	and	Downstairs
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#5:	 Move	 it	 or	 lose	 it:	 A	 powerful	 way	 to	 help	 a	 child	 regain
upstairs-downstairs	balance	is	to	have	him	move	his	body.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
When	your	child	is	upset,	make	sure	to	acknowledge	his	feelings.
This	 should	 always	 be	 your	 �rst	 move.	 But	 then,	 as	 quickly	 as
possible,	 get	 him	 moving.	 Roughhouse	 with	 him.	 Play	 follow	 the
leader.	Race	him	to	his	bedroom	and	back.	Get	him	to	move	and
you’ll	change	his	mood.
TYPE	OF	INTEGRATION
Integrating	Memory
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#6:	 Use	 the	 remote	 of	 the	 mind:	 After	 an	 upsetting	 event,	 the
internal	remote	lets	a	child	pause,	rewind,	and	fast-forward	a	story
as	she	tells	it,	so	she	can	maintain	control	over	how	much	of	it	she
views.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
Children	this	small	may	not	know	about	a	remote,	but	they	know
the	power	of	a	story.	Enjoy	this	time	when	your	child	wants	to	tell
(and	 retell)	 stories.	 Rather	 than	 pausing	 and	 fast-forwarding,	 you
may	end	up	simply	pressing	play	repeatedly	as	you	tell	the	same
story	multiple	times.	Even	if	you	feel	annoyed	at	having	to	go	over
the	account	again	and	again,	remember	that	storytelling	produces
understanding,	healing,	and	integration.
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#7:	Remember	to	remember:	Help	your	kids	exercise	their	memory
by	giving	them	lots	of	practice	at	remembering.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
At	this	age,	ask	simple	questions,	focusing	on	returning	your	child’s
attention	to	the	details	of	her	day.	We	went	to	Carrie’s	house	today,
didn’t	we?	And	do	you	remember	what	we	did	there?	Questions	like
these	are	the	building	blocks	for	an	integrated	memory	system.
TYPE	OF	INTEGRATION
Integrating	the	Many	Parts	of	Myself
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#8:	Let	the	clouds	of	emotion	roll	by:	Remind	kids	that	feelings	come
and	go.	Fear,	frustration,	and	loneliness	are	temporary	states,	not
enduring	traits.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
Lay	 the	 foundation	 for	 an	 awareness	 of	 the	 di�erence	 between
“feel”	and	“am.”	When	young	children	feel	sad	(or	angry	or	afraid),
they	have	a	hard	time	understanding	that	they	won’t	always	feel
that	way.	So	help	them	say,	“I	feel	sad	right	now,	but	I	know	I’ll	be
happy	later.”	Be	careful,	though,	that	you	don’t	dismiss	the	actual
feelings.	 Acknowledge	 the	 present	 emotion	 and	 provide	 comfort,
then	help	your	child	understand	that	he	won’t	feel	sad	forever,	that
he	will	feel	better	soon.
TYPE	OF	INTEGRATION
Integrating	the	Many	Parts	of	Myself
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#9:	SIFT:	Help	your	children	notice	and	understand	the	sensations,
images,	feelings,	and	thoughts	within	them.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
Help	 your	 child	 become	 aware	 of	 and	 talk	 about	 her	 internal
world.	 Ask	 questions	 that	 guide	 her	 toward	 noticing	 bodily
sensations	(Are	you	hungry?),	mental	images	(What	 do	 you	 picture
when	 you	 think	 about	 Grandma’s	 house?),	 feelings	 (It’s	 frustrating
when	the	blocks	fall,	isn’t	it?),	and	thoughts	(What	do	you	think	will
happen	when	Jill	comes	over	tomorrow?).
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#10:	Exercise	mindsight:	Mindsight	practices	teach	children	to	calm
themselves	and	focus	their	attention	where	they	want.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
Even	small	children	can	learn	to	be	still	and	take	calm	breaths,	if
only	for	a	few	seconds.	Have	your	child	lie	on	her	back	and	place	a
toy	boat	on	her	stomach.	Show	her	how	to	take	slow,	big	breaths
to	 make	 the	 boat	 go	 up	 and	 down.	 Keep	 this	 exercise	 very	 short
since	 she’s	 so	 young.	 Just	 let	 her	 experience	 the	 feeling	 of	 being
still,	quiet,	and	peaceful.
TYPE	OF	INTEGRATION
Integrating	Self	and	Other
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#11:	Increase	the	family	fun	factor:	Build	fun	into	the	family,	so	that
your	kids	enjoy	positive	and	satisfying	experiences	with	the	people
they’re	with	the	most.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
Follow	your	child’s	lead	and	just	play.	Tickle	him,	laugh	with	him,
love	 him.	 Stack	 things	 up,	 knock	 them	 down.	 Bang	 on	 pots	 and
pans,	go	to	the	park,	roll	the	ball.	With	every	interaction	in	which
you	 focus	 on	 and	 attune	 to	 your	 child,	 you	 can	 create	 positive
expectations	in	his	mind	about	what	it	means	to	love	and	be	in	a
relationship.
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#12:	 Connect	 through	 con�ict:	 Rather	 than	 an	 obstacle	 to	 avoid,
view	 con�ict	 as	 an	 opportunity	 to	 teach	 your	 kids	 essential
relationship	skills.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
Talk	 with	 your	 child	 about	 sharing	 and	 taking	 turns,	 but	 don’t
expect	too	much	from	her.	In	the	coming	years	you	will	have	many
opportunities	 to	 teach	 social	 skills	 and	 discipline.	 Right	 now,	 if
there’s	 con�ict	 between	 her	 and	 another	 child,	 help	 her	 express
how	she	feels	and	how	the	other	child	might	feel,	and	help	them
problem-solve	 if	 possible.	 Then	 redirect	 them	 both	 so	 they	 can
transition	into	a	different	activity	they	can	each	enjoy.
Preschooler	(3–6)
TYPE	OF	INTEGRATION
Integrating	the	Left	and	Right	Brain
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#1:	 Connect	 and	 redirect:	 When	 your	 child	 is	 upset,	 connect	 �rst
emotionally,	right	brain	to	right	brain.	Then,	once	she	is	more	in
control	and	receptive,	bring	in	the	left-brain	lessons	and	discipline.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
First,	 lovingly	 hear	 what’s	 upset	 your	 child.	 Hug	 her	 and	 repeat
back	 to	 her	 what	 you’ve	 heard	 with	 nurturing	 nonverbal
communication:	You’re	 really	 disappointed	 that	 Molly	 can’t	 come
over?	 Then,	 once	 you’ve	 connected,	 help	 direct	 her	 toward
problem	 solving	 and	 more	 appropriate	 behavior:	I	 know	 you’re
upset,	but	you	need	to	be	gentle	with	Mommy.	Do	you	have	another
idea	 for	 playing?	 Maybe	 we	 could	 see	 if	 Molly	 can	 come	 over
tomorrow.
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#2:	Name	it	to	tame	it:	When	big,	right-brain	emotions	are	raging
out	of	control,	help	your	child	tell	the	story	about	what’s	upsetting
him.	 In	 doing	 so,	 he’ll	 use	 his	 left	 brain	 to	 make	 sense	 of	 his
experience	and	feel	more	in	control.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
Whether	 it’s	 a	 “small-t”	 or	 “big-T”	 trauma,	 you	 can	 start	 the
storytelling	process	almost	right	away	(once	you’ve	connected	right
brain	 to	 right).	 At	 this	 age,	 he’ll	 need	 you	 to	 take	 the	 lead:	You
know	 what	 I	 saw?	 I	 saw	 you	 running,	 and	 when	 your	 foot	 hit	 that
slippery	 spot,	 you	 fell.	 Is	 that	 what	 happened??	 If	 he	 continues	 the
story,	 great.	 But	 if	 needed,	 you	 can	 continue:	So	 then	 you	 started
crying,	 and	 I	 ran	 over	 to	 you	 and	 …	 It	 can	 be	 helpful	 to	 make	 a
homemade	 book	 with	 drawings	 or	 photos	 to	 retell	 an	 upsetting
story,	or	to	prepare	your	child	for	a	transition,	like	a	new	bedtime
routine	or	starting	school.
TYPE	OF	INTEGRATION
Integrating	the	Upstairs	and	Downstairs
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#3:	 Engage,	 don’t	 enrage:	 In	 high-stress	 situations,	 engage	 your
child’s	 upstairs	 brain	 by	 asking	 her	 to	 consider	 and	 plan	 and
choose,	 rather	 than	 triggering	 her	 downstairs	 brain,	 which	 is	 less
about	thinking	and	more	about	reacting.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
Setting	 clear	 boundaries	 is	 important,	 but	 we	 often	 say	 no	 more
than	we	need	to.	When	your	child	is	upset,	be	creative.	Instead	of
saying,	We	 don’t	 act	 that	 way,	 ask,	What’s	 another	 way	 you	 could
handle	that?	 Instead	 of	I	don’t	like	the	way	you’re	talking,	 try,	Can
you	think	of	another	way	to	say	that,	one	that	will	be	more	polite?	Then
praise	 her	 when	 she	 uses	 her	 upstairs	 brain	 to	 come	 up	 with
alternatives.	A	great	question	to	help	avoid	power	struggles	is,	Can
you	come	up	with	an	idea	for	how	we	can	both	get	what	we	want?
TYPE	OF	INTEGRATION
Integrating	the	Upstairs	and	Downstairs
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#4:	 Use	 it	 or	 lose	 it:	 Provide	 lots	 of	 opportunities	 to	 exercise	 the
upstairs	 brain	 so	 it	 can	 be	 strong	 and	 integrated	 with	 the
downstairs	brain	and	the	body.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
In	 addition	 to	 introducing	 your	 child	 to	 shapes	 and	 letters	 and
numbers,	play	“What	would	you	do?”	games	that	present	him	with
hypothetical	 dilemmas.	What	would	you	do	if	you	were	at	the	park
and	found	a	toy	that	you	really	wanted,	but	you	knew	it	belonged	to
someone	else?	Read	together	and	ask	your	child	to	predict	how	the
story	 will	 end.	 Also,	 give	 him	 lots	 of	 opportunities	 to	 make
decisions	for	himself,	even	(and	especially)	when	it’s	difficult.
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#5:	 Move	 it	 or	 lose	 it:	 A	 powerful	 way	 to	 help	 a	 child	 regain
upstairs-downstairs	balance	is	to	have	him	move	his	body.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
Kids	this	age	love	to	move.	So	when	your	child	is	upset,	and	after
you’ve	 acknowledged	 his	 feelings,	 give	 him	 reasons	 to	 move	 his
body.	Wrestle	with	him.	Play	“keep	it	up”	with	a	balloon.	Toss	a
ball	back	and	forth	while	he’s	telling	you	why	he’s	upset.	Moving
the	body	is	a	powerful	way	to	change	a	mood.
TYPE	OF	INTEGRATION
Integrating	Memory
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#6:	 Use	 the	 remote	 of	 the	 mind:	 After	 an	 upsetting	 event,	 the
internal	remote	lets	a	child	pause,	rewind,	and	fast-forward	a	story
as	she	tells	it,	so	she	can	maintain	control	over	how	much	of	it	she
views.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
Most	likely,	your	preschooler	loves	telling	stories.	Encourage	this.
Tell	 stories	 about	 anything	 that	 happens:	 good,	 bad,	 and	 in
between.	And	when	a	signi�cant	event	occurs,	be	willing	to	narrate
and	 renarrate	 the	 story.	 Even	 if	 your	 child	 may	 not	 know	 much
about	remote	controls,	she	may	be	able	to	“go	back”	and	“pause”
her	story.	She’ll	be	delighted	to	hear	you	tell,	and	help	you	tell	and
retell,	the	story	of	any	big	moment	in	her	life.	So	be	prepared	to
“press	 play”	 over	 and	 over	 again—and	 know	 that	 when	 you	 do,
you’re	promoting	healing	and	integration.
TYPE	OF	INTEGRATION
Integrating	Memory
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#7:	Remember	to	remember:	Help	your	kids	exercise	their	memory
by	giving	them	lots	of	practice	at	remembering.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
Ask	questions	that	exercise	the	memory:	What	did	Ms.	Alvarez	think
of	the	robot	you	took	in	for	sharing	today?	Remember	when	Uncle	Chris
took	you	to	get	a	snow	cone?	Play	memory	games	that	ask	your	child
to	match	up	pairs	or	�nd	like	items,	maybe	pictures	of	friends	and
family	with	speci�c	stories	or	memories.	Especially	on	important
events	 you	 want	 him	 to	 remember,	 take	 turns	 talking	 about	 the
details	that	stood	out	for	each	of	you.
TYPE	OF	INTEGRATION
Integrating	the	Many	Parts	of	Myself
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#8:	Let	the	clouds	of	emotion	roll	by:	Remind	kids	that	feelings	come
and	go.	Fear,	frustration,	and	loneliness	are	temporary	states,	not
enduring	traits.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
One	reason	big	feelings	can	be	so	uncomfortable	for	small	children
is	that	they	don’t	view	those	emotions	as	temporary.	So	while	you
comfort	your	child	when	she’s	upset,	teach	her	that	feelings	come
and	go.	Help	her	see	that	it’s	good	to	acknowledge	her	emotions,
but	it’s	also	good	to	realize	that	even	though	she’s	sad	(or	angry	or
scared)	right	now,	she’ll	probably	be	happy	again	in	a	few	minutes.
You	can	even	“lead	the	witness”	and	ask,	When	do	you	think	you’ll
feel	better?
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#9:	SIFT:	Help	your	children	notice	and	understand	the	sensations,
images,	feelings,	and	thoughts	within	them.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
Talk	to	your	child	about	his	inner	world.	Help	him	understand	that
he	can	notice	and	talk	about	what’s	going	on	in	his	mind	and	body.
He	probably	won’t	be	ready	for	the	acronym	SIFT	yet,	but	you	can
help	 him	 ask	 questions	 that	 guide	 him	 toward	 noticing	 bodily
sensations	 (Are	you	hungry?),	mental	images	(What	do	you	picture
when	 you	 think	 about	 Grandma’s	 house?),	 feelings	 (It’s	 frustrating
when	friends	don’t	share,	isn’t	it?),	and	thoughts	(What	do	you	think
will	happen	at	school	tomorrow?).
TYPE	OF	INTEGRATION
Integrating	the	Many	Parts	of	Myself
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#10:	Exercise	mindsight:	Mindsight	practices	teach	children	to	calm
themselves	and	focus	their	attention	where	they	want.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
At	this	age,	kids	can	practice	taking	calm	breaths,	especially	if	you
keep	the	exercises	brief.	Have	your	child	lie	on	her	back,	and	place
a	toy	boat	on	her	stomach.	Show	her	how	to	take	slow	big	breaths
to	 make	 the	 boat	 go	 up	 and	 down.	 You	 can	 also	 tap	 into	 your
child’s	 vivid	 imagination	 at	 this	 age	 to	 give	 her	 practice	 focusing
attention	 and	 shifting	 her	 emotional	 state:	Imagine	 that	 you	 are
resting	on	the	warm	sand	at	the	beach	and	you	are	feeling	calm	and
happy.
TYPE	OF	INTEGRATION
Integrating	Self	and	Other
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#11:	Increase	the	family	fun	factor:	Build	fun	into	the	family,	so	that
your	kids	enjoy	positive	and	satisfying	experiences	with	the	people
they’re	with	the	most.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
You	don’t	have	to	try	too	hard	to	have	fun	with	your	preschooler.
Just	being	with	you	is	paradise	for	him.	Spend	time	with	him,	play
games,	 and	 laugh	 together.	 Facilitate	 fun	 with	 siblings	 and
grandparents.	 Be	 silly	 and	 turn	 potential	 power	 struggles	 into
playful	 and	 funny	 moments	 of	 joining.	 When	 you	 are	 intentional
about	 having	 fun	 and	 creating	 enjoyable	 family	 rituals,	 you’re
making	 an	 investment	 in	 your	 relationship	 that	 will	 pay	 o�	 for
years	to	come.
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#12:	 Connect	 through	 con�ict:	 Rather	 than	 an	 obstacle	 to	 avoid,
view	 con�ict	 as	 an	 opportunity	 to	 teach	 your	 kids	 essential
relationship	skills.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
Use	 con�ict	 your	 preschooler	 faces—with	 her	 siblings,	 with	 her
classmates,	even	with	you—to	teach	her	lessons	about	how	to	get
along	 with	 others.	 Sharing,	 taking	 turns,	 and	 asking	 for	 and
granting	 forgiveness	 are	 important	 concepts	 she’s	 ready	 to	 learn.
Model	these	for	her,	and	take	the	time	to	kneel	down	and	help	her
understand	 what	 it	 means	 to	 be	 in	 a	 relationship	 and	 how	 to	 be
considerate	and	respectful	of	others,	even	during	times	of	conflict.
Early	School	Age	(6–9)
TYPE	OF	INTEGRATION
Integrating	the	Left	and	Right	Brain
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#1:	 Connect	 and	 redirect:	 When	 your	 child	 is	 upset,	 connect	 �rst
emotionally,	right	brain	to	right	brain.	Then,	once	she	is	more	in
control	and	receptive,	bring	in	the	left-brain	lessons	and	discipline.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
Listen	 �rst,	 then	 repeat	 how	 your	 child	 is	 feeling.	 At	 the	 same
time,	 use	 your	 nonverbal	 communication	 to	 comfort.	 Hugs	 and
physical	 touch,	 along	 with	 empathetic	 facial	 expressions,	 remain
powerful	 tools	 for	 calming	 big	 emotions.	 Then	 redirect	 through
problem	solving	and,	depending	on	the	circumstance,	discipline	and
boundary	setting.
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#2:	Name	it	to	tame	it:	When	big,	right-brain	emotions	are	raging
out	of	control,	help	your	child	tell	the	story	about	what’s	upsetting
him.	 In	 doing	 so,	 he’ll	 use	 his	 left	 brain	 to	 make	 sense	 of	 his
experience	and	feel	more	in	control.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
Whether	 it’s	 a	 “small-t”	 or	 “big-T”	 trauma,	 you	 can	 start	 the
storytelling	process	almost	right	away	(once	you’ve	connected	right
brain	to	right	brain).	Whereas	with	younger	kids	you	may	need	to
do	most	of	the	storytelling	and	with	older	kids	you	can	let	them
take	the	lead,	with	a	school-age	child	you	need	to	balance	the	two.
Ask	 lots	 of	 questions:	Did	 you	 just	 not	 notice	 that	 the	 swing	 was
coming	toward	you?	or	What	did	your	teacher	do	when	he	said	that	to
you?	 What	 happened	 after	 that?	 It	 can	 be	 helpful	 to	 make	 a
homemade	 book	 with	 drawings	 or	 photos	 to	 retell	 an	 upsetting
story,	or	to	prepare	your	child	for	something	she	is	dreading,	like	a
visit	to	the	dentist	or	a	move.
TYPE	OF	INTEGRATION
Integrating	the	Upstairs	and	Downstairs
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#3:	 Engage,	 don’t	 enrage:	 In	 high-stress	 situations,	 engage	 your
child’s	 upstairs	 brain	 by	 asking	 her	 to	 consider	 and	 plan	 and
choose,	 rather	 than	 triggering	 her	 downstairs	 brain,	 which	 is	 less
about	thinking	and	more	about	reacting.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
As	always,	connect	�rst.	Avoid	immediately	playing	the	“Because	I
said	so!”	card.	Your	child’s	upstairs	brain	is	blossoming	right	now,
so	let	it	do	its	job.	Explain	your	reasons,	invite	questions,	ask	for
alternative	 solutions,	 and	 even	 negotiate.	 You’re	 the	 authority	 in
the	 relationship,	 and	 there’s	 no	 place	 for	 disrespect,	 but	 you	 can
encourage	 your	 child	 to	 come	 up	 with	 di�erent	 approaches	 to
discipline	or	learning	a	lesson.	When	we	expect	and	facilitate	more
sophisticated	thinking,	we’re	less	likely	to	get	a	reactive,	�ghting
response.
TYPE	OF	INTEGRATION
Integrating	the	Upstairs	and	Downstairs
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#4:	 Use	 it	 or	 lose	 it:	 Provide	 lots	 of	 opportunities	 to	 exercise	 the
upstairs	 brain	 so	 it	 can	 be	 strong	 and	 integrated	 with	 the
downstairs	brain	and	the	body.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
Play	 “What	 would	 you	 do?”	 games	 and	 present	 your	 child	 with
dilemmas:	If	a	bully	was	picking	on	someone	at	school	and	there	were
no	adults	around,	what	would	you	do?	Encourage	empathy	and	self-
understanding	through	re�ective	dialogues	about	how	others	feel,
and	 about	 his	 own	 intentions,	 desires,	 and	 beliefs.	 Also,	 let	 your
child	struggle	with	di�cult	decisions	and	situations.	Whenever	you
can	do	so	responsibly,	avoid	solving	and	resist	rescuing,	even	when
he	 makes	 minor	 mistakes	 or	 not-so-great	 choices.	 After	 all,	 your
goal	 here	 isn’t	 perfection	 on	 every	 decision	 right	 now,	 but	 an
optimally	developed	upstairs	brain	down	the	road.
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#5:	 Move	 it	 or	 lose	 it:	 A	 powerful	 way	 to	 help	 a	 child	 regain
upstairs-downstairs	balance	is	to	have	him	move	his	body.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
Connect	 with	 your	 child	 when	 she’s	 upset,	 then	 �nd	 ways	 to	 get
her	moving.	Get	on	your	bikes	together.	Play	“keep	it	up”	with	a
balloon	 or	 try	 some	 yoga	 poses.	 Depending	 on	 your	 particular
child,	 you	 may	 need	 to	 be	 more	 direct	 about	 what	 you’re	 doing.
Don’t	 feel	 that	 you	 need	 to	 “trick”	 her	 or	 hide	 your	 strategy.	 Be
direct	and	explain	to	her	the	“move	it	or	lose	it”	concept,	then	use
the	lesson	to	teach	her	that	we	can	actually	control	our	moods	to	a
significant	extent.
TYPE	OF	INTEGRATION
Integrating	Memory
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#6:	Use	the	remote	of	the	mind:	After	a	painful	event,	the	internal
remote	lets	a	child	pause,	rewind,	and	fast-forward	a	story	as	she
tells	it,	so	she	can	maintain	control	over	how	much	of	it	she	views.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
A	 child	 this	 age	 may	 shy	 away	 from	 retelling	 di�cult	 stories	 or
recalling	painful	memories.	Help	him	understand	the	importance	of
looking	 at	 what’s	 happened	 to	 him.	 Be	 gentle	 and	 nurturing,	 and
give	him	the	power	to	pause	the	story	at	any	point,	and	even	to
fast-forward	 past	 unpleasant	 details.	 But	 make	 sure	 that	 at	 some
point,	 even	 if	 it’s	 later	 on,	 you	 rewind	 and	 tell	 the	 entire	 story,
including	even	the	painful	parts.
TYPE	OF	INTEGRATION
Integrating	Memory
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#7:	Remember	to	remember:	Help	your	kids	exercise	their	memory
by	giving	them	lots	of	practice	at	remembering.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
In	the	car,	at	the	dinner	table,	wherever,	help	your	child	talk	about
her	 experiences,	 so	 she	 can	 integrate	 her	 implicit	 and	 explicit
memories.	This	is	especially	important	when	it	comes	to	the	most
important	moments	of	her	life,	like	family	experiences,	important
friendships,	 and	 rites	 of	 passage.	 Simply	 by	 asking	 questions	 and
encouraging	 recollection,	 you	 can	 help	 her	 remember	 and
understand	 important	 events	 from	 the	 past,	 which	 will	 help	 her
better	understand	what’s	happening	to	her	in	the	present.
TYPE	OF	INTEGRATION
Integrating	the	Many	Parts	of	Myself
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#8:	Let	the	clouds	of	emotion	roll	by:	Remind	kids	that	feelings	come
and	go.	Fear,	frustration,	and	loneliness	are	temporary	states,	not
enduring	traits.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
Help	your	child	pay	attention	to	the	words	he	uses	when	he	talks
about	his	feelings.	There’s	nothing	wrong	with	saying,	“I’m	scared.”
But	 help	 him	 understand	 that	 another	 way	 to	 say	 it	 is,	 “I	feel
scared.”	 This	 minor	 shift	 in	 vocabulary	 can	 help	 him	 understand
the	subtle	but	important	distinction	between	“feel”	and	“am.”	He
may	feel	afraid	in	the	moment,	but	that	experience	is	temporary,
not	permanent.	To	give	him	perspective,	ask	him	how	he	expects	to
feel	 in	 �ve	 minutes,	 �ve	 hours,	 �ve	 days,	 �ve	 months,	 and	 �ve
years.
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#9:	SIFT:	Help	your	children	notice	and	understand	the	sensations,
images,	feelings,	and	thoughts	within	them.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
Introduce	the	wheel	of	awareness.	Also,	play	the	SIFT	game	in	the
car	or	at	dinner	and	actually	teach	your	child	the	acronym.	Help
her	 understand	 that	 we	 need	 to	 notice	 what’s	 going	 on	 within
ourselves	 if	 we	 want	 to	 control	 the	 way	 we	 feel	 and	 act.	 Ask
questions	that	guide	her	toward	noticing	bodily	sensations	(Are	you
hungry?),	mental	images	(What	do	you	picture	when	you	think	about
Grandma’s	house?),	feelings	(It’s	not	fun	to	feel	left	out,	is	it?),	 and
thoughts	(What	do	you	think	will	happen	at	school	tomorrow?).
TYPE	OF	INTEGRATION
Integrating	the	Many	Parts	of	Myself
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#10:	Exercise	mindsight:	Mindsight	practices	teach	children	to	calm
themselves	and	focus	their	attention	where	they	want.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
Children	 this	 age	 can	 understand	 and	 feel	 the	 bene�ts	 of	 getting
calm	and	focusing	the	mind.	Give	them	practice	at	being	still	and
quiet,	and	let	them	enjoy	the	calm	within.	By	guiding	their	mind
through	 visualization	 and	 imagination,	 show	 them	 that	 they	 have
the	 ability	 to	 focus	 their	 attention	 on	 thoughts	 and	 feelings	 that
bring	 them	 happiness	 and	 peace.	 Show	 them	 that	 anytime	 they
need	 to	 calm	 themselves,	 they	 can	 simply	 slow	 down	 and	 pay
attention	to	their	breathing.
TYPE	OF	INTEGRATION
Integrating	Self	and	Other
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#11:	 Increase	 the	 family	 fun	 factor:	 Build	 fun	 into	 the	 family,	 so
your	kids	enjoy	positive	and	satisfying	experiences	with	the	people
they’re	with	the	most.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
Do	what	you	love	doing	together.	Have	a	family	movie	night	with
popcorn.	Play	a	board	game.	Ride	bikes.	Make	up	a	story	together.
Sing	and	dance.	Just	spend	time	together	being	happy	and	silly,	and
it	 will	 create	 a	 strong	 relational	 foundation	 for	 the	 future.	 Be
intentional	 about	 having	 fun	 and	 creating	 enjoyable	 rituals	 and
memories.
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#12:	 Connect	 through	 con�ict:	 Rather	 than	 an	 obstacle	 to	 avoid,
view	 con�ict	 as	 an	 opportunity	 to	 teach	 your	 kids	 essential
relationship	skills.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
Your	 child	 is	 old	 enough	 now	 for	 more	 relational	 sophistication.
Explicitly	teach	a	skill,	then	practice	it.	Explain	about	seeing	other
people’s	 perspectives,	 then	 pick	 out	 random	 people	 in	 a	 store	 or
restaurant	 and	 try	 to	 guess	 what’s	 important	 to	 them	 and	 where
they’re	 coming	 from.	 Teach	 about	 reading	 nonverbal	 cues,	 then
play	 a	 game	 to	 see	 how	 many	 examples	 (frowning,	 shrugging,
lifting	 eyebrows,	 etc.)	 you	 can	 come	 up	 with.	 Teach	 about	 going
beyond	apologizing	when	we’ve	messed	up,	then	come	up	with	a
timely	example	where	your	child	can	put	it	into	practice	by	writing
a	letter	or	replacing	something	important.
Later	School	Age	(9–12)
TYPE	OF	INTEGRATION
Integrating	the	Left	and	Right	Brain
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#1:	Connect	and	Redirect:	When	 your	 child	 is	 upset,	 connect	 �rst
emotionally,	right	brain	to	right	brain.	Then,	once	she	is	more	in
control	and	receptive,	bring	in	the	left-brain	lessons	and	discipline.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
Listen	�rst,	then	re�ect	back	how	your	child	is	feeling.	Be	careful
not	to	condescend	or	talk	down	to	her.	Just	echo	what	you	hear.
And	use	nonverbals.	Even	though	your	child	is	growing	up,	she	still
wants	 to	 be	 nurtured	 by	 you.	 Once	 she	 feels	 felt,	 it’s	 time	 to
redirect	to	planning	and,	if	necessary,	discipline.	Show	your	child
the	 respect	 of	 speaking	 clearly	 and	 directly.	 She’s	 old	 enough	 to
hear	and	understand	a	logical	explanation	of	the	situation	and	any
resulting	consequences.
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#2:	Name	it	to	tame	it:	When	big,	right-brain	emotions	are	raging
out	of	control,	help	your	child	tell	the	story	about	what’s	upsetting
him.	 In	 doing	 so,	 he’ll	 use	 his	 left	 brain	 to	 make	 sense	 of	 his
experience	and	feel	more	in	control.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
First,	acknowledge	feelings.	This	is	no	less	true	for	a	big	kid	than	it
is	for	a	small	one	(or	an	adult).	Just	express,	explicitly,	what	you
observe:	I	 don’t	 blame	 you	 for	 being	 upset.	 I	 would	 be,	 too.	 Then
facilitate	the	storytelling.	Ask	questions	and	be	present,	but	let	him
tell	his	own	story,	in	his	own	time.	Especially	in	painful	moments,
it’s	important	that	kids	talk	about	what’s	happened	to	them.	But	we
can’t	force	them	to	do	so.	We	can	only	be	patient	and	present	and
allow	them	to	talk	when	they’re	ready.	If	your	child	doesn’t	want
to	 talk	 to	 you	 about	 it,	 suggest	 journaling,	 or	 help	 him	 �nd
someone	he	will	talk	to.
TYPE	OF	INTEGRATION
Integrating	the	Upstairs	and	Downstairs
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#3:	 Engage,	 don’t	 enrage:	 In	 high-stress	 situations,	 engage	 your
child’s	 upstairs	 brain	 by	 asking	 her	 to	 consider	 and	 plan	 and
choose,	 rather	 than	 triggering	 her	 downstairs	 brain,	 which	 is	 less
about	thinking	and	more	about	reacting.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
This	is	one	of	the	worst	ages	to	play	the	“Because	I	said	so!”	card.
Instead,	 encourage	 your	 child’s	 blossoming	 upstairs	 brain	 by
appealing	to	it	whenever	you	can.	Maintain	your	authority	in	the
relationship,	 but	 as	 much	 as	 possible,	 discuss	 alternatives	 and
negotiate	 with	 her	 when	 it	 comes	 to	 rules	 and	 discipline.	 Be
respectful	 and	 creative	 as	 you	 help	 her	 improve	 her	 higher-order
thinking	faculties	by	asking	her	to	participate	with	you	in	making
decisions	and	coming	up	with	solutions.
TYPE	OF	INTEGRATION
Integrating	the	Upstairs	and	Downstairs
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#4:	 Use	 it	 or	 lose	 it:	 Provide	 lots	 of	 opportunities	 to	 exercise	 the
upstairs	 brain	 so	 it	 can	 be	 strong	 and	 integrated	 with	 the
downstairs	brain	and	the	body.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
Hypothetical	 situations	 become	 more	 and	 more	 fun	 as	 a	 child’s
brain	 develops.	 Play	 “What	 would	 you	 do?”	 games	 and	 present
your	child	with	dilemmas.	These	games	can	be	purchased,	but	you
can	come	up	with	your	own	situations:	If	your	friend’s	mother	had
been	drinking	before	she	was	supposed	to	drive	you	home,	how	would
you	handle	it?	 Encourage	 empathy	 and	 self-understanding	 through
re�ective	 dialogues	 about	 how	 others	 feel,	 and	 your	 child’s	 own
intentions,	desires,	and	beliefs.	Also,	let	him	struggle	with	di�cult
decisions	 and	 situations,	 even	 when	 he	 makes	 minor	 mistakes	 or
not-so-great	 choices.	 After	 all,	 your	 goal	 here	 isn’t	 perfection	 on
every	 decision	 right	 now,	 but	 an	 optimally	 developed	 upstairs
brain	down	the	road.
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#5:	 Move	 it	 or	 lose	 it:	 A	 powerful	 way	 to	 help	 a	 child	 regain
upstairs-downstairs	balance	is	to	have	him	move	his	body.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
Be	 direct	 about	 how	 moving	 his	 body	 can	 help	 shift	 your	 child’s
mood.	Especially	when	he’s	upset,	explain	how	helpful	it	is	to	take
a	break	and	get	up	and	move.	Suggest	a	bike	ride	or	a	walk,	or	do
something	 physically	 active	 with	 him,	 such	 as	 playing	 Ping-Pong.
Even	taking	a	break	to	stretch	or	play	with	a	yo-yo	can	help.
TYPE	OF	INTEGRATION
Integrating	Memory
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#6:	Use	the	remote	of	the	mind:	After	a	painful	event,	the	internal
remote	lets	a	child	pause,	rewind,	and	fast-forward	a	story	as	she
tells	it,	so	she	can	maintain	control	over	how	much	of	it	she	views.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
As	 she	 approaches	 adolescence,	 your	 child	 may	 become	 more
reluctant	 to	 talk	 with	 you	 about	 painful	 experiences.	 Explain	 the
importance	of	implicit	memory,	and	how	the	associations	of	a	past
experience	can	still	a�ect	her.	Teach	her	that	she	can	gain	control
over	an	experience	by	retelling	the	story.	Be	gentle	and	nurturing,
and	give	her	the	power	to	pause	the	story	at	any	point,	and	even	to
fast-forward	 past	 unpleasant	 details.	 But	 make	 sure	 that	 at	 some
point,	 even	 if	 it’s	 later	 on,	 you	 rewind	 and	 tell	 the	 entire	 story,
including	the	painful	parts.
TYPE	OF	INTEGRATION
Integrating	Memory
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#7:	Remember	to	remember:	Help	your	kids	exercise	their	memory
by	giving	them	lots	of	practice	at	remembering.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
In	the	car	and	at	the	dinner	table,	in	scrapbooks	or	journals,	help
your	 child	 think	 about	 her	 experiences,	 so	 she	 can	 integrate	 her
implicit	and	explicit	memories.	This	is	especially	important	when	it
comes	 to	 the	 most	 important	 moments	 of	 her	 life,	 like	 family
experiences,	important	friendships,	and	rites	of	passage.	Simply	by
asking	 questions	 and	 encouraging	 recollection,	 you	 can	 help	 her
remember	and	understand	important	events	from	the	past,	which
will	 help	 her	 better	 understand	 what’s	 happening	 to	 her	 in	 the
present.
TYPE	OF	INTEGRATION
Integrating	the	Many	Parts	of	Myself
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#8:	Let	the	clouds	of	emotion	roll	by:	Remind	kids	that	feelings	come
and	go.	Fear,	frustration,	and	loneliness	are	temporary	states,	not
enduring	traits.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
Your	 child	 is	 old	 enough	 to	 understand	 this	 point	 on	 a	 conscious
level,	 but	 be	 sure	 to	 hear	 his	 feelings	 before	 you	 teach	 this
information.	 Then,	 once	 you’ve	 validated	 his	 feelings,	 help	 him
understand	 that	 they	 won’t	 last	 forever.	 Highlight	 the	 subtle	 but
important	distinction	between	“I	feel	sad”	and	“I	am	sad.”	To	give
him	perspective,	ask	him	how	he	expects	to	feel	in	�ve	minutes,
five	hours,	five	days,	five	months,	and	five	years.
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#9:	SIFT:	Help	your	children	notice	and	understand	the	sensations,
images,	feelings,	and	thoughts	within	them.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
Some	 kids	 this	 age	 may	 actually	 be	 interested	 in	 the	 concept	 of
SIFTing	 to	 see	 what’s	 going	 on	 inside	 themselves.	 Understanding
these	categories	can	give	them	some	measure	of	control	over	their
lives,	 which,	 as	 they	 move	 toward	 being	 teenagers,	 will
increasingly	feel	more	and	more	chaotic.	Also,	this	is	a	great	age	to
regularly	 use	 the	 wheel	 of	 awareness	 to	 help	 understand	 and
respond	to	issues	that	arise.
TYPE	OF	INTEGRATION
Integrating	the	Many	Parts	of	Myself
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#10:	Exercise	mindsight:	Mindsight	practices	teach	children	to	calm
themselves	and	focus	their	attention	where	they	want.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
Explain	 to	 your	 child	 the	 signi�cant	 bene�ts	 of	 getting	 calm	 and
focusing	the	mind.	Give	her	practice	at	being	still	and	quiet,	and	let
her	 enjoy	 the	 calm	 within.	 Show	 her	 that	 she	 has	 the	 ability	 to
focus	 her	 attention	 on	 thoughts	 and	 feelings	 that	 bring	 her
happiness	and	peace.	Introduce	her	to	some	of	the	practices	in	this
book,	such	as	guided	visualizations	and	focusing	on	her	breath,	or
look	at	some	of	the	in�nite	resources	you’ll	�nd	at	the	library	or
online.
TYPE	OF	INTEGRATION
Integrating	Self	and	Other
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#11:	Increase	the	family	fun	factor:	Build	fun	into	the	family,	so	that
your	kids	enjoy	positive	and	satisfying	experiences	with	the	people
they’re	with	the	most.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
The	 cliché	 is	 that	 as	 kids	 move	 toward	 their	 teenage	 years,	 they
less	and	less	enjoy	being	with	their	parents.	To	some	extent	this	is
true.	But	the	more	meaningful	and	enjoyable	experiences	you	give
your	child	now,	the	more	he’ll	want	to	be	with	you	in	the	years	to
come.	 Kids	 this	 age	 still	 love	 silliness	 and	 play,	 so	 don’t
underestimate	the	power	of	a	game	of	charades	or	an	interactive
board	 game	 when	 it	 comes	 to	 strengthening	 family	 relationships.
Go	camping.	Cook	together.	Visit	a	theme	park.	Just	�nd	ways	to
appreciate	 being	 together,	 creating	 fun	 rituals	 you	 can	 enjoy	 for
years	to	come.
WHOLE-BRAIN	STRATEGY
#12:	 Connect	 through	 con�ict:	 Rather	 than	 an	 obstacle	 to	 avoid,
view	 con�ict	 as	 an	 opportunity	 to	 teach	 your	 kids	 essential
relationship	skills.
APPLICATIONS	OF	THE	STRATEGY
All	the	relational	and	conflict	resolution	skills	you’ve	been	trying	to
give	 your	 child	 since	 she	 was	 learning	 to	 talk—seeing	 other
people’s	perspectives,	reading	nonverbal	cues,	sharing,	apologizing
—are	 the	 same	 lessons	 you’re	 teaching	 as	 she	 moves	 toward
adolescence.	Keep	talking	about	these	skills	explicitly,	and	practice
them.	Whether	you’re	asking	your	child	to	see	the	world	through
someone	 else’s	 eyes,	 or	 write	 a	 note	 of	 apology,	 teach	 her	 that
con�ict	is	something	not	to	avoid	but	to	resolve,	and	that	doing	so
often	improves	a	relationship.
For	Maddi	and	Alex:	Thank	you	both	for	all	you’ve	taught	me	over	these	years	and	for	the
privilege	of	being	your	dad;	and	for	Caroline,	for	the	love	and	our	journey	together	—DJS
For	the	men	in	my	life:	my	husband,	Scott,	and	our	three	boys.	You	�ll	every	day	with	fun,
adventure,	love,	and	meaning.	—TPB
Acknowledgments
Being	parents	and	therapists	ourselves,	we	know	the	importance	of
�nding	 applications	 that	 are	 simple,	 accessible,	 practical,	 and
e�ective.	At	the	same	time,	we	are	both	trained	as	scientists,	so	we
know	 the	 power	 of	 scienti�cally	 grounded	 work	 that	 builds	 on
cutting-edge	 knowledge.	 We	 are	 profoundly	 grateful	 to	 the	 many
people	 who	 have	 helped	 us	 keep	 this	 book	 based	 �rmly	 on
scienti�c	research,	but	also	solidly	planted	in	the	practical	world	of
everyday	parenting.
We	have	been	fortunate	to	work	with	academic	and	professional
colleagues	at	both	USC	and	UCLA	in	various	departments	who	both
supported	our	work	and	inspired	us	with	their	research	endeavors
into	 the	 brain	 and	 relationships.	 Dan’s	 �rst	 book,	The	 Developing
Mind,	was	revised	during	the	time	we	wrote	The	Whole-Brain	Child,
with	 the	 incorporation	 of	 over	 two	 thousand	 new	 scienti�c
references.	We	want	to	thank	the	scientists	and	researchers	whose
work	we	drew	on	so	we	could	ensure	that	the	translation	of	this
knowledge	is	as	current	as	possible.
The	 manuscript	 itself	 emerged	 in	 close	 collaboration	 with	 our
wonderful	 literary	 agent	 and	 friend,	 Doug	 Abrams,	 who	 lent	 his
novelist’s	eye	and	editor’s	hands	to	mold	the	book	throughout	its
gestation.	 It	 has	 been	 a	 pleasure	 to	 work	 like	 three	 whole-brain
musketeers	taking	on	the	challenges	of	translating	such	important
ideas	 into	 direct,	 accessible,	 and	 accurate	 applications	 of	 the
science	 for	 everyday	 use.	 We	 can’t	 wait	 for	 our	 next	 adventure
together!
We	 also	 thank	 our	 clinical	 colleagues	 and	 the	 students	 at	 the
Mindsight	 Institute	 and	 in	 our	 various	 seminars	 and	 parenting
groups	(especially	the	Tuesday	night	and	Monday	morning	groups)
who	have	provided	feedback	about	many	of	the	ideas	that	make	up
the	foundation	of	the	whole-brain	approach	to	parenting.	A	number
of	 individuals	 read	 the	 manuscript	 and	 contributed	 valuable
comments	that	helped	“�eld-test”	the	book.	Laura	Hubber,	Jenny
Lorant,	Lisa	Rosenberg,	Ellen	Main,	Jay	Bryson,	Sara	Smirin,	Je�
Newell,	 Gina	 Griswold,	 Celeste	 Neuho�,	 Elisa	 Nixon,	 Christine
Adams,	 Sarah	 Heidel,	 Lea	 Payne,	 Heather	 Sourial,	 Bradley
Whitford,	and	Andre	van	Rooyen	o�ered	excellent	feedback	on	the
text,	illustrations,	and	cover.	Others	were	essential	to	this	book’s
creation,	and	we	especially	thank	Deborah	and	Galen	Buckwalter,
Jen	and	Chris	Williams,	Liz	and	Steve	Olson,	Linda	Burrow,	Robert
Colegrove,	Patti	Ni,	and	Gordon	Walker	for	their	support	and	time.
We	 gratefully	 acknowledge	 the	 e�orts	 of	 Beth	 Rashbaum,	 our
original	 editor,	 as	 well	 as	 our	 current	 editor,	 Marnie	 Cochran,
whose	dedication	and	wisdom	(not	to	mention	patience)	guided	us
in	 every	 stage	 of	 the	 process.	 We	 were	 fortunate	 to	 have	 two
editors	 who	 care	 profoundly	 for	 books	 and	 for	 children.	 And	 we
o�er	a	big,	artistic	thank-you	to	our	illustrator,	Merrilee	Liddiard,
a	 delight	 to	 work	 with,	 who	 lent	 her	 talent,	 creative	 eye,	 and
experience	as	a	mom	to	making	the	book	a	whole-brain	experience
for	the	reader.
To	the	parents	and	teachers	who	have	heard	us	speak	or	whom
we’ve	had	the	privilege	of	working	with	in	some	capacity,	we	are
deeply	 thankful	 for	 the	 enthusiasm	 with	 which	 you’ve	 embraced
the	whole-brain	perspective.	Your	stories	of	how	these	approaches
have	 transformed	 your	 relationships	 with	 your	 children	 have
inspired	us	throughout	this	process.	We	particularly	thank	all	the
parents	 and	 patients	 whose	 stories	 and	 experiences	 inform	 this
book.	Although	we’ve	changed	your	names	and	the	details	of	your
stories	 here,	we	 know	 who	 you	 are,	 and	 we’re	 grateful.	 Thanks,
also,	to	all	of	you	who	discussed	and	voted	on	possible	book	titles
while	 watching	 Little	 League	 games	 and	 enjoying	 Lily’s	 fourth
birthday	 party	 next	 door!	 It	 certainly	 has	 been	 a	 community
endeavor	to	bring	these	practical	ideas	into	as	clear	and	concise	an
expression	as	possible.
Our	 devotion	 to	 helping	 children	 develop	 resilient	 minds	 and
compassionate	 relationships	 begins	 at	 home.	 We	 are	 profoundly
grateful	not	only	to	our	own	parents,	but	to	our	spouses,	Caroline
and	 Scott,	 whose	 wisdom	 and	 direct	 editorial	 input	 are	 woven
throughout	these	pages.	Our	spouses	are	not	only	our	best	friends
but	 also	 our	 best	 collaborators,	 and	 they	 helped	 us	 through
countless	drafts	of	writing	and	rewriting,	sharing	their	own	literary
talents	and	parenting	wisdom.	This	book	could	not	have	happened
without	 them.	 Scott	 generously	 lent	 his	 English	 professor’s	 eye,
writer’s	 mind,	 and	 editor’s	 pen	 to	 make	 this	 book	 �ow	 and	 read
more	clearly.	This	family	e�ort	is	expressed	most	fully	in	our	own
personal	lives	through	our	children,	our	best	teachers,	whose	love
and	playfulness,	emotion	and	devotion,	are	inspiring	to	us	in	ways
words	cannot	begin	to	describe.	We	thank	them	from	the	depths	of
our	 hearts	 for	 the	 opportunity	 to	 be	 their	 parents	 along	 this	 life
journey.	 It	 is	 their	 exploration	 of	 the	 many	 dimensions	 of	 their
development	 that	 gives	 us	 the	 motivation	 to	 share	 these	 ideas
about	integration	with	you.	So	it	is	to	our	children	that	we	lovingly
dedicate	The	 Whole-Brain	 Child	 in	 hopes	 that	 this	 book	 will	 also
allow	 you	 and	 the	 children	 you	 care	 for	 to	 share	 the	 journey
toward	integration,	health,	and	well-being.
ABOUT	THE	AUTHORS
DANIEL	J.	SIEGEL,	M.D.,	is	a	graduate	of	Harvard	Medical	School	and
completed	 his	 postgraduate	 medical	 education	 at	 UCLA	 with
training	 in	 pediatrics	 and	 child,	 adolescent,	 and	 adult	 psychiatry.
He	 is	 currently	 a	 clinical	 professor	 of	 psychiatry	 at	 the	 UCLA
School	 of	 Medicine,	 co-director	 of	 UCLA’s	 Mindful	 Awareness
Research	 Center,	 co-investigator	 at	 the	 Center	 for	 Culture,	 Brain
and	 Development,	 and	 executive	 director	 of	 the	 Mindsight
Institute,	 an	 educational	 center	 devoted	 to	 promoting	 insight,
compassion,	and	empathy	in	individuals,	families,	institutions,	and
communities.	 Dr.	 Siegel’s	 psychotherapy	 practice	 over	 the	 last
twenty-�ve	 years	 has	 included	 children,	 adolescents,	 adults,
couples,	 and	 families.	 Dr.	 Siegel	 is	 also	 the	 author	 of	 several
acclaimed	 books,	 including	Parenting	 from	 the	 Inside	 Out:	 How	 a
Deeper	 Self-Understanding	 Can	 Help	 You	 Raise	 Children	 Who	 Thrive
(with	Mary	Hartzell,	M.Ed.),	The	Mindful	Brain,	Mindsight:	The	New
Science	 of	 Personal	 Transformation,	 and	The	 Developing	 Mind.	 He
lives	 in	 Los	 Angeles	 with	 his	 wife	 and	 two	 children.	 For	 more
information	about	his	educational	programs	and	resources,	please
visit	drdansiegel.com.
TINA	 PAYNE	 BRYSON,	 PH.D.,	 is	 a	 psychotherapist	 at	 Pediatric	 and
Adolescent	Psychology	Associates	in	Arcadia,	California,	where	she
sees	 children	 and	 adolescents,	 as	 well	 as	 provides	 parenting
consultations.	 In	 addition	 to	 writing	 and	 lecturing	 to	 parents,
educators,	and	professionals,	she	serves	as	the	director	of	parenting
education	and	development	for	the	Mindsight	Institute,	focusing	on
how	 to	 understand	 relationships	 in	 the	 context	 of	 the	 developing
brain.	Dr.	Bryson	earned	her	Ph.D.	from	the	University	of	Southern
California,	where	her	research	explored	attachment	science,	child-
rearing	
theory,	
and	
the	
emerging	
�eld	
of	
interpersonal
neurobiology.	 She	 lives	 near	 Los	 Angeles	 with	 her	 husband	 and
three	children.	For	more	information	about	her	work	and	parenting
resources,	please	visit	tinabryson.com.
